

9. Plaintiff further asserted that Defendant No.1 - Smt.Girijabai and original Defendant No.2 Mr.Ambadas took out Notice of Motion No.2622 of 1998 in Suit No.9083 of 1969 for transferring tenancy rights of the premises in favour of Appellants-Defendants Nos.1 and 2. Plaintiff further submitted that, as such the Defendants are tresspassers, and as the tresspass is a continuing wrong, suit is not barred by law of limitation. On these among other assertions, plaintiff instituted the suit.

26025/- i.e.150 times of Rs.173.50. He therefore submitted that the City Civil Court, Mumbai will have pecuniary jurisdiction as well to entertain and try the suit. He submitted that the Defendants are tresspassers and the tresspass being a continuing wrong, having regard to Section 22 of the Limitation Act, 1963, (for short the Act) a fresh period of limitation begins to run at every moment of time during which the breach continues. He therefore submitted that suit is not barred by limitation. He prayed for dismissal of the appeal.

suit premises). Considering the valuation made by plaintiff, the City Civil Court, Mumbai will undoubtedly have pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit.

30.Mr.Kurup submitted that at any rate suit is barred by limitation. He submitted that under consent terms dated 27th April, 1981, the Court Receiver was directed to take steps for recovering possession by filing necessary suit for that purpose.

Even thereafter as per the consent terms dated 13th July, 1982 the Court Receiver was permitted to adopt legal proceedings against Ramrao for obtaining actual physical possession. That apart by order dated 20th March, 1997 learned Judge directed plaintiff to instituted suit on or before 13th April, 1997. Even by that time, suit was not instituted and the present suit is instituted on 11th January, 2000 and consequently it suffers from gross delay and latches, and hence the suit is liable to be dismissed, being barred by limitation. On the other hand Mr.Bhate relying upon Section 22 of the Act, submitted that Defendants are tresspassers and have no semblance of right, title and interest in the suit premises. Tresspass, being a continuing wrong, fresh period of limitation begins to run at every moment of time during which the breach continues. He therefore submitted that the suit is well within limitation.

31.I have already held that Defendants are tresspassers and they have no semblance of right, title and interest in the suit premises. Section 22 of the Act reads as under:-

"In the case of a continuing breach of contract or in the case of a continuing tort, a fresh period of limitation begins to run at every moment of the time during which the breach or the tort, as the case may be, continues."

Section 2(m) of the Act defines "tort" to mean a civil wrong which is not exclusively the breach of a contract or the breach of a trust. Tresspass upon the immovable property is unwarrantable entry upon the immovable property of another or any direct and immediate act of interference with the possession of such property. Tresspass is a wrongful act done in disturbance of the possession of the property of another or against the person of another against his will. The tresspass continues so long as unlawful entry lasts. Thus the right to sue will continue de die in diem till it is removed. The wrongful acts of Defendants are of such a character that the injury caused by them is continuous. The acts of Defendants constitute a continuing wrong. Tresspass being a continuing wrong, having regard to section 22 of the Act, in my opinion, suit is not time barred.
