

(c) and 2843/49 (a), dated the 30th March, 1950, invalid. It further held that the word"addict" in the medical certif- icate was not warranted by the provisions of the Act. The two important questions which this Court is called upon to decide in these appeals are :--

(1) whether there are sufficient grounds for declaring the whole Act to be invalid; and (2) to what extent the judgment of the High Court can be upheld with regard to the specific provisions of the Act which have been declared by it to be void. It seems to me that it will be convenient to deal in the first instance with the argument assailing the validity of the Act as a whole, which is based on three grounds, these being :-- (1) that the law is an encroachment on the field which has been assigned exclusively to the Central Legislature under entry 19 of List I;

It is obvious that the proper occasion to deal with the third ground will be after examining the specific provisions which have been declared by the High Court to be void, but the first two grounds may be dealt with at once. The first question is whether the impugned law can be said to have made any encroachment upon the field of legis- lation assigned to the Centre. In order to decide this point, it will be necessary to refer to entry No. 31 in List II, under which the law purports to have been made, and entry No. 19 of List I, which is said to have been trans- gressed. These entries run as follows:--

To the same effect are the following observations made by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Governor- General in Council v. Province of Madras(3), (1) Vide United Provinces v. Atiqa Begum, [1940] F.C.R. 110 at 134.

(2) [1939] F.C.R. 18. (3) [1945] F.C.R. 179 at 191.

after referring to section 100 of the Government of India Act, 1935 :--

"Their Lordships do not doubt that the effect of these words is that, if the legislative powers of the Federal and Provincial Legislatures, which are enumerated in List I and List II of the Seventh Schedule, cannot fairly be recon- ciled, the latter must give way to the former. But it ap- pears to them that it is right first to consider whether a fair reconciliation cannot be effected by giving to the language of the Federal Legislative List a meaning which, if less wide than it might in another context bear, is yet one that can properly be given to it, and equally giving to the language of the Provincial Legislative, List a meaning which it can properly bear." In the present case, as already pointed out. the words "possession and sale" occurring in entry 31 of List II are to be read without any qualification whatsoever, and it will not be doing any violence to the construction of that entry to hold that the Provincial Legislature has the power to prohibit the possession, use and sale of intoxicating liquor absolutely. If we forget for the time being the principles which have been laid down in some of the American cases, it would be difficult to hold that the word 'import' standing by itself will include either sale or possession of the article imported into the country by a person residing in the territory in which it is imported. There is thus no real conflict between entry 31 of List II and entry 19 of List I, and I find it difficult to hold that the Bombay Prohibition Act in so far as it pur- ports to restrict possession, use and sale of foreign liq- uor. is an encroachment on the field assigned to the Federal Legislature under entry 19 of List I.

There is also another way of dealing with the contention raised before us. It is well settled that the validity of an Act is not affected if it incidentally trenches on mat- ters outside the authorised field, and therefore it is necessary to inquire in each case what is the pith and substance of the Act impugned. If the Act, when so viewed, substantially falls within the powers expressly conferred upon the Legislature which enact- ed it, then it cannot be held to be invalid, merely because it incidentally encroaches on matters which have been as- signed to another legislature. This was emphasised very clearly in Gallagher v. Lynn(1) in these words :--
