5) In order to prove its case the prosecution has examined as many as Eleven Witnesses as under :

Public Witness:

(6) PW8 Kapil has deposed that he is residing at the given address along with his family comprising of his mother, himself, his wife and two children. He has deposed that the name of his mother is Meena Devi who is aged around 55 years. According to the witness, on 01.08.2012 his mother had gone to visit his mama at D­666, Mangolpuri and on 03.08.2012 he had gone to pick her up and on 04.08.2012 he was returning at about 8:35 is when they reached near LK block, Shiv Mandir, Mangolpuri on foot and reached near S block, two boys on one pulsor motorcycle of black color came from the back towards his right side and stopped in front of them. According to the witness, they (assailants) snatched the chain of his mother and when he tried to stop them, the boy who was sitting on the pillion seat wearing a black pant picked up his shirt and put out a knife. The witness has deposed that on seeing the same he ducked, the said boys than ran away on their bike and he chased them on foot raising an alarm of chor­chor. He has deposed that he made a call to the police on 100 number and after the police officials came on a gypsy, he told them about the State Vs. Nitin @ Sunny, FIR 283/12, PS Mangolpuri Page No.3 of 49 incident. According to the witness both the boys were around 25­30 years of age. He has deposed that when the chain of his mother was snatched, the boy sitting on the pillion seat wearing a black pant had put his one leg down and snatched the chain of his mother "ek tang niche rakh kar mere mother ki chain par japata mara". The witness has further deposed that he gave his statement to the police which is Ex.PW8/A bearing his signatures at point A. He has deposed that the IO also prepared the site plan on his pointing out. According to him the boy who was driving the motorcycle was wearing a helmet and the boy who was sitting on the pillion seat was not wearing a helmet. He has deposed that he could only see the face of the boy who was sitting on the pillion seat as he was not wearing a helmet but he could not identify the person who was driving the motorcycle as he was wearing helmet. He has deposed that he could identify the person who had snatched the chain of his mother. Witness has correctly identified the accused Nitin @ Sunny in the court. Witness has deposed that he had also gone to the Tihar Jail for TIP proceedings but could not identify the person as he was wearing helmet at the time of incident. The TIP proceedings of accused Sandeep who has already been discharged are collectively Ex.PW 8/B and Ex.PW 8/C.

(43) Applying the settled principles of law to the facts of the present case, I may observe that the complainant Kapil (PW8) is aged 31 years. He has identified the accused Nitin in the court and has given State Vs. Nitin @ Sunny, FIR 283/12, PS Mangolpuri Page No.28 of 49 clear account of the incident and how it transpired. The relevant portion of his testimony is reproduced as under:

    I am residing at the aforementioned address along with my family comprising of my mother, myself, my wife and two children. The name of my mother is Meena Devi who is aged around 55 years. On 01.08.2012 my mother had gone to visit my mama at D­666, Mangolpuri and on 03.08.2012 I had gone to pick her up and on 04.08.2012 I was returning at about 8:35 AM when we reached near LK block, Shiv Mandir, Mangolpuri on foot and reached near S block, two boys on one pulsor motorcycle of black color came from the back towards my right side and stopped in front of us. They snatched the chain of my mother and when I tried to stop them, the boy who was sitting on the pillion seat wearing a black pant picked up his shirt and put out a knife. On seeing the same I ducked, the said boys than ran away on their bike and I chased them on foot raising an alarm chor­chor. I made a call to the police on 100 number. After the police officials came on a gypsy, I told them about the incident. Both the boys were around 25­30 years of age. When the chain of my mother was snatched, the boy sitting on the pillion seat wearing a black pant had put his one leg down and snatched the chain of my mother "ek tang niche rakh kar mere mother ki chain par japata mara". I gave my statement to the State Vs. Nitin @ Sunny, FIR 283/12, PS Mangolpuri Page No.29 of 49 police which is EX PW 8/A bearing my signatures at point A. IO also prepared the site plan on my pointing out. The boy who was driving the motorcycle was wearing a helmet and the boy who was sitting on the pillion seat was not wearing a helmet. I could only see the face of the boy who was sitting on the pillion seat as he was not wearing a helmet but I could not identify the person who was driving the motorcycle as he was wearing helmet. I can identify the person who had snatched the chain of my mother. 

(50) I have considered the rival contentions and also the case law cited by the Ld. Addl PP. I may observe that in so far as Meena Devi is concerned, this court has noticed that during her examination in the court she appears to be sick and was not giving answers consistently. She is aged about 55 years of age and states that she is suffering from a State Vs. Nitin @ Sunny, FIR 283/12, PS Mangolpuri Page No.37 of 49 neurological problem due to which reason she does not recollect many tings. In so far as the material aspects on the incident i.e. assailants coming on motorcycle, snatching the gold chain, making of call at 100 number by her son Kapil and raising alarm "chor chor pakro pakro" and thereafter police cames to the spot and registration of FIR, are concerned, both eye witnesses / victims namely Kapil and Meena Devi are very categorical. They both have identified the accused Nitin as the person who was sitting as pillion rider and has snatched the gold chain which Meena Devi was wearing. This aspect that after snatching the chain when Kapil tried to resist, the accused Nitin wiped out a knife like object, has not been corroborated by Meena Devi. There is an element of surprise and naturally the sudden snatching would have kept both the victims Kapil and Meena shocked and surprised when the incident had taken place and hence it is only natural that he could not have noted down the number of the motorcycle on which the assailants had come or what transpired thereafter. In so far as the Meena Devi is concerned, the fact that she is unable to tell whether she went with the police in search of the accused or not, makes no difference because none of the assailants could be apprehended on the said day. The contradictions so pointed out by the Ld. Defence Counsel are not material. State Vs. Nitin @ Sunny, FIR 283/12, PS Mangolpuri Page No.38 of 49 (51) Now coming to the arguments that the accused was falsely implicated and wrongly identified by the victims only to divert the blame on him. Here, I may note that a specific suggestion had been made to Kapil and he has stated that he has no inimical terms with the accused Nitin and there is no reason for him to falsely implicate him and I find merits in the same. I may observe that both Kapil and Meena Devi were not known to the accused Nitin prior to the incident and they had no personal interest in falsely implicating the accused Nitin having no enmity with him, particularly so when Kapil himself has not been able to identify the co­accused Sandeep and has very categorically explained in the court that he could not see the face of the person who was driving the motorcycle which was natural because the assailants came from behind and motorcycle came in front of victim Meena Devi. In so far the accused Nitin is concerned, the complainant Kapil is very categorical when he states that the accused Nitin who was sitting in pillion seat put his one leg on the ground and snatched the gold chain from his mother Meena Devi and when he (Kapil) resisted, Nitin picked up his shirt and wiped out a knife like object on which he (Kapil) scared and thereafter both the boys ran away on the motorcycle after which he made a call at 100 number. There was sufficient opportunity for both Kapil and Meena Devi to have closely observed the boy sitting on the State Vs. Nitin @ Sunny, FIR 283/12, PS Mangolpuri Page No.39 of 49 pillion seat as he was the one who put his one foot done and came in front of the victim while committing the snatching. The depositions / testimonies of both Kapil and Meena Devi on the face of it is credible and cannot be doubted and the events as they emerged are probable and truthful and under no circumstances can it be stated that Nitin has been falsely implicated by the victims as claimed by them. (52) In this background I hold that the prosecution has been able to prove the identify of the accused Nitin as the pillion rider who had committed the robbery of gold chain from Smt. Meena Devi. Apprehension / Arrest of the Accused and their Defence : (53) It is writ large that on the very next day i.e. on 05.08.2012 while the complainant Kapil was in the area, it is he who saw the accused Nitin near the Church at Mangolpuri, who was standing near a bike and was talking to somebody, on which he immediately went towards the machi market and made a call to the police station and after about five minutes one police official came and he pointed out the accused Nitin to him and he was arrested and on his casual search, a gold chain was recovered from his pocket and he (Kapil) identified the same as belonging to his mother. In fact Kapil has proved the personal search of accused Nitin and the recovery of the gold chain photograph of which is Ex.P1. (chain is on superdari).

State Vs. Nitin @ Sunny, FIR 283/12, PS Mangolpuri Page No.43 of 49 Charge under Section 397 IPC not proved:

(60) The case of the prosecution is that while committing the robbery of the gold chain upon the victim Meena Devi, the accused had used a knife / dangerous weapon. In this regard I may observe that no doubt in the first statement to the police on the basis of which FIR had been registered, the complainant Kapil had stated that the knife like object had been shown to him by the assailant but it is writ large from his narration that after the gold chain was snatched and Kapil tried to apprehend him, it was then that the accused allegedly took out a knife like object and showed him to felicitate his escape. No such knife has been recovered from the possession of the accused. In this regard, the testimony of Meena who is the actual victim from whose neck the chain was snatched is also relevant. She turned hostile on the point of the accused having shown a knife like object to them. She has denied the suggestion of Addl. PP that she did not tell the police that when the assailant snatched the chain and when her son Kapil resisted the assailant, he showed a knife to Kapil.
