This is an appeal preferred by the State against the order of acquittal by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Kandukuru in C. C. No. 38 of 1951.

2. The facts are: On the night of 24-4-1950 at Ayyanakota there was house-breaking by night and theft in the house of P. W. 1 Venkatasubbiah. This burglary was discovered by him the next morning. It was then found that the big wooden chest or Bhoshanam box had been broken open and the boxes M. O. 1 belonging to P. W. 1 and M. O. 2 belonging to the son-in-law of P. W. 1 viz., P. W. 2 and 3 boxes M. Os. 3 to 5 belonging to P. W. 3 and valuable jewellery and clothing of the family of P. W. 1 and the clothes left for safe custody by some shepherds had been removed from that Bhoshanam Box. P. W. 1 found 3 or 4 chains away from his house some of these opened boxes which he identified as those kept in the chest. Then P. W. 1 went to inform the Triune Officer P. W. 6 who was in the fields who visited the scene of offence and got a report Ex. P1 made out in the hand-writing of P. W. 2 and which has been signed by P. W. 1. P. W. 6 then sent the usual reports to the Police and the Magistracy, P. W. 12, the Sub-Inspector of Police, Pamur, reached the scene of offence at 8 A.M. on 26-4-1950. The boxes which were found lying broken open viz., M. Os. 1 to 5 at distance from the house of P. W. 1 and the lock of the Boshanam box M. O. 6 were seized. P. W. 1 gave a supplemental list of properties lost. P. W. W Venkiah who had been deputed by P. W. 1 to trace the footsteps leading from P. W. 1's door step returned saying that the footsteps led to Narappa Reddi's well where he found a silver Kunkarna Bharani (M. O. 10) and a silver tin for keeping the katuka (M. O. 9) and from inside the well an aluminium vessel M. O. 11. P. W. 10 finally lost the footsteps on reaching Pichollakonda. P. W. 12 took these M. Os. 9 to 11 into custody.

3 has also got to be rejected. But the mere fact that the defence testimony has proved unhelpful need not detain us further because it is for the prosecution to establish the guilt of the accused and not for the accused to establish their innocence. It is on that footing I shall examine the evidence in this case.

17. There is no dispute in this case about the burglary in the house of P. W. 1 on the night of 24-4-1950. Immediate report of the same has been made to the Triune Officer P. W. 6 and he came and inspected the scene. The first information in this case has been sent without any practicable delay and this first information sets out the details of this burglary. It is a strong piece of corroborative circumstance. P. W. 10 further corroborates the commission of this burglary and speaks to his tracing the footsteps from the burgled houses his discovering M. Os. 9 and 10 near Narappa Reddi's well and his tracing the footsteps as far as Picholla Konda. It is not also the case for the accused that a burglary did not take place but their case is that they are not the burglars or the receivers of stolen property. Therefore it may be taken as safely established that a burglary as alleged by P. W. 1 took place in his house on the night of 24-4-1950.

It can be taken therefore as safely established that part of the loot of this burglary was sold by accused 2 to P. W. 7 and was recovered from the possession of P. W. 7 in the form of gold and silver ingots.

20. Having established that a burglary as alleged by the prosecution took place on the night of 24-4-1950 in the house of P. W. 1 and that a lot of these properties had been recovered and produced in Court and satisfactorily identified as properties lost in that burglary we have to consider whether the accused persons were in possession of these properties shortly after the commission of this offence and were satisfactorily proved to have been in exclusive possession thereof and that such possession was unaccompanied by any explanation of innocent origin.

28. The accused persons in this case having, thus been shown to have been in exclusive possession of the stolen properties of P. Ws. 1 to 2 shortly after the commission of the burglary in the house of P. W. 1 that possession not having been legitimately accounted for by the accused the presumption can be safely drawn under Section 114(a), I. E. A. that the accused were the guilty thieves or guilty receivers. The weight of evidence in this case is more in favour of our drawing the conclusion that the accused were the guilty receivers rather than thieves.
