APPEARANCES
Mr. Pradip Ghosh, Senior Advocate, Mr. Sanjay Sen, Mr. Rana S. Biswas, Mr. Manish P.S. Chouhar, Mr. Vishal Anand, Ms. Ruchi Rathi and Mrs. Sarla Chandra, Advocates with him for the Appellants

Ms. Radha Rangaswamy, Advocate for the Respondent
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Indian Penal Code, 1860
Section 304B - Indian Evidence Act, 1872, Section 113B - Dowry death - Ingredients of the offence - Unnatural death of married woman within seven years of her marriage - Suicidal death - Parents of the victim complaining of dowry death - No evidence or finding to the effect that there was any cruelty or harassment for or in connection with the demand of dowry. Held mere evidence of cruelty and harassment is not sufficient to bring the offence within Section 304B but it has to be shown in addition that such cruelty or harassment was for or in connection with demand for dowry. Since the prosecution failed to prove that aspect the conviction cannot be maintained.
HELD
If Section 304 B IPC is read together with Section 113 B of the Evidence Act, a comprehensive picture emerges that if a married woman dies in an unnatural circumstances at her matrimonial home within 7 years from her marriage and there are allegations of cruelty or harassment upon such married woman for or in connection with demand of dowry by the husband or relatives of the husband, the case would squarely come under "dowry death" and there shall be a presumption against the husband and the relatives. (Para 9)

In this case we find that there is practically no evidence to show that there was any cruelty or harassment for or in connection with the demand of dowry. There is also no finding in that regard. This deficiency in evidence proves fatal for the prosecution case. Even otherwise mere evidence of cruelty and harassment is not sufficient to bring in application of Section 304B IPC. It has to be shown in addition that such cruelty or harassment was for or in connection with the demand for dowry. (See: Kanchy Ramchander v. State of A.P. Since the prosecution failed to prove that aspect, the conviction as recorded cannot be maintained. (Para 10)

CASES REFERRED
1.Kanchy Ramchander v. State of A.P. (1996 SCC (Crl.) 31) (Para 10)



2.Smt. Shanti and Anr. v. State of Haryana [JT 1991 (1) SC 118] (Para 5)

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. Appellants call in question legality of the judgment rendered by a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court dismissing the appeal filed by the appellants, but modifying the sentence. Appellants faced trial for commission of offences punishable under Section 304B read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short the 'IPC') and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (in short the 'DP Act').

3. The prosecution version in brief is as follows:

3.1 Rupali, sister of informant Dilip Patra (PW-1) was married to appellant Biswajit Halder-appellant no.1 on 6th March, 1992. Appellants Dulal Chandra Halder and Maya Halder are the parents of Biswajit. At the time of marriage dowry i.e. of Rs.43,000/-, gold ornaments and the household articles were given to the appellants, but they were not satisfied with the dowry items. Since marriage Rupali was put under pressure to bring one colour television, English Khat and VIP bag for her father-in-law and other relatives. Rupali time and again had reported about the persistent demand of the appellants to her father and brothers. Rupali's brother (PW-1) on different occasions requested the appellants not to harass Rupali for non-payment of those items. On 27th July, 1992 Rupali committed suicide at the house of the appellants by consuming poison and after getting the sad news from his relatives, PW-1, who being a member of Indian Armed Forces was posted at Punjab, came to his native village and lodged the FIR on 6th August, 1992.

3.2 On receipt of the FIR, police started investigation and on completion of investigation, charge sheet was submitted against the appellants for their trial.

3.3 The learned Additional Sessions Judge, after framing charges against all the three appellants examined 17 witnesses in all, including PW-1, relatives of the victim woman, two doctors and the investigating officer.

3.4 On examination of the prosecution evidence and after hearing both the prosecution and defence, the learned Additional Sessions Judge found sufficient materials against all the appellants to convict them for offences punishable under Sections 304B/34 and 498A/34 of the IPC and also under Sections 3 and 4 of the DP Act. Learned trial Judge, after convicting the appellants, sentenced them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for ten years each for the offence punishable under Section 304B of the IPC. The appellants were sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year each and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- for the offence punishable under Section 498A of the IPC. In default of the payment rigorous imprisonment for three months was stipulated. Learned trial Judge also sentenced the appellants to suffer rigorous imprisonment for five years each and to pay a fine of Rs.15,000/- each under Section 3(1) of the DP Act and that apart, the appellants were also sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for six months each and to pay a fine of Rs.10,000/- each for the offence under Section 4 of the DP Act with default stipulation. Learned trial Judge directed that all the sentences were to run concurrently.

3.5 Questioning correctness of the conviction and the sentences imposed appellants preferred appeal before the Calcutta High Court which held that the appellants were to suffer the minimum sentence as prescribed under Section 304B IPC, but there was no necessity for separately sentencing the appellants on either Section 498A IPC or Sections 3 and 4 of the DP Act.

4. In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellants submitted that there was no finding that there was demand for dowry and/or that deceased was subjected to cruelty or harassment, or that harassment was for or in connection with the demand of dowry.

5. Learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand submitted that Section 304B IPC has to be read in the context of Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in short 'Evidence Act'). The court could presume the death of the deceased to be dowry death and it was open to the Court to presume further that the appellants being members of the matrimonial home at the relevant were responsible for the dowry death of the deceased. Reliance was placed on a decision of this Court in Smt. Shanti and Anr. v. State of Haryana1.

6. The basic ingredients to attract the provisions of Section 304B are as follows:-

(1) The death of a woman should be caused by burns or fatal injury or otherwise than under normal circumstances;

(2) Such death should have occurred within seven years of her marriage;

(3) She must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband; and

(4) Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with demand for dowry.

7. Alongside insertion of Section 304B in IPC, legislature also introduced Section 113B of Evidence Act, which lays down when the question as to whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

8. Explanation appended to Section 113 B lays down that "for the purpose of this section 'dowry death' shall have the same meaning as in Section 304 B of IPC".

9. If Section 304 B IPC is read together with Section 113 B of the Evidence Act, a comprehensive picture emerges that if a married woman dies in an unnatural circumstances at her matrimonial home within 7 years from her marriage and there are allegations of cruelty or harassment upon such married woman for or in connection with demand of dowry by the husband or relatives of the husband, the case would squarely come under "dowry death" and there shall be a presumption against the husband and the relatives.

10. In this case we find that there is practically no evidence to show that there was any cruelty or harassment for or in connection with the demand of dowry. There is also no finding in that regard. This deficiency in evidence proves fatal for the prosecution case. Even otherwise mere evidence of cruelty and harassment is not sufficient to bring in application of Section 304B IPC. It has to be shown in addition that such cruelty or harassment was for or in connection with the demand for dowry. (See: Kanchy Ramchander v. State of A.P.2 Since the prosecution failed to prove that aspect, the conviction as recorded cannot be maintained.

11. The appeal is allowed.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2004 AIR (SC) 1720
2004 (9) SCC 713
APPEARANCES
Mrs. D. Bharathi Reddy, Advocate for the Appellant.

Mr.Guntur Prabhakar, Advocate for the Respondent.

HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Evidence Act, 1872
Sections 32(1), 3 - Indian Penal Code, 1860 - Sections 306, 498A - Dying declarations - Evidence - Appreciation - Cruelty leading to suicide - First statement made at 3.30 p.m. - Only mother-in-law accused of unbearable harassment - Statement recorded by magistrate, after removing all persons from room - Second statement, after 5 minutes, by head constable - Harassment by husband on her parents' visit to her and husband and mother-in-law did not want her to speak amicably to her relatives - Father's statement showing a misunderstanding due to children of husband's sister being brought up in said family - No accusation about ill-treatment or harassment by husband of deceased or her mother-in-law or other members - Except the two dying declarations no other evidence - All PWs not supporting prosecution - Yet, conviction on the basis of dying declarations - High Court confirming conviction under Section 498A only - Justification. Held that the two statements being inconsistent, it is not safe to rely upon and convict the accused under Section 498A also. Appeal allowed.
HELD
In the first dying declaration there is no mention about the appellant having treated the deceased with cruelty or of his having caused harassment to the deceased. In fact, his name does not find place in the relevant portion of the first dying declaration. The first dying declaration was recorded by a magistrate after taking all necessary precautions. The deceased was in a position to make a statement which was certified by the treating physician who was also present when the statement was recorded. Only 5 minutes thereafter another statement was recorded by the head constable and in that dying declaration allegations have been made against the appellant and fact stated relating to the immediate cause which led the deceased to commit suicide which are attributable to the appellant, though there is a statement that her mother-in-law also used to harass her. (Para 12)

The deceased did not in her first dying declaration accuse the appellant of having caused harassment to her, or having ill-treated her, and therefore there is no justification for convicting the appellant even for the offence under section 498A I.P.C. (Para 13)

The father of the deceased namely, PW-1, in his deposition stated that misunderstandings arose between his daughter and her husband on account of the fact that the three children of the deceased sister of the appellant were being brought up in the house of the appellant which was objected to by the deceased. If in those unfortunate circumstances the three children of the deceased sister of the appellant were being brought up in his family, one cannot blame the appellant or his parents for having shown compassion towards the children of his deceased sister. If that is what caused annoyance to the deceased, one cannot equate such conduct with cruelty or harassment. Having regard to the inconsistency in the two dying declarations we do not find it safe to act solely on them to convict the appellant, and for that reason even accused no.2, the mother of the appellant. (Para 14)

Ed: In this case, the court directed the acquittal of mother-in-law of deceased even though, her SLP had been dismissed.


B.P. SINGH, J.

1. This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order of the High Court of judicature at Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad dated November 26, 1996 in criminal revision case no.195 of 1995 whereby the High Court while partly allowing the appeal and acquitting the appellant of the charge under section 306 I.P.C, confirmed his conviction and sentence under section 498A I.P.C on which count the appellant has been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years and to pay a fine of Rs.1000/-.

2. The appellant Lella Srinivasa Rao and his mother Lella Gangamamba were tried by the assistant sessions judge, Chirala charged of the offences under sections 498A and 306 I.P.C. The case of the prosecution was that the appellant herein was married to the deceased Bhavani about three years before the date of occurrence which took place on 15.8.1990. The case of the prosecution was that the appellant as well as his mother (accused no.2) treated Bhavani (deceased) with such cruelty, and harassed her to such an extent, that she was forced to commit suicide at about 12.45 p.m. on 15.8.1990. She set fire to herself as well as her daughter who was about 1-1/2 years old as a result of which both of them succumbed to their injuries later on the same day. The trial court found them guilty of the offence under section 306 I.P.C. and sentenced both the accused to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years under section 306 I.P.C. and three years rigorous imprisonment under section 498A I.P.C. Both the accused preferred criminal appeal no. 169 of 1992 which came to be disposed of by the court of session, Prakasam division, Ongole who dismissed the appeal and upheld the convictions and sentences. The accused thereafter challenged their convictions and sentences before the High Court which set aside the conviction under section 306 I.P.C. but upheld their conviction and sentence under section 498A I.P.C.

3. From the record it appears that both the accused preferred special leave petitions before this Court. The special leave petition of accused no.2, Lella Gangamamba was dismissed by order dated 28.4.1997 and notice was issued confined to the petition on behalf of the appellant herein, which was later admitted for hearing.

4. As noticed earlier, the deceased was married to the appellant on 24th January, 1988. It appears that some differences cropped up between them to which we shall refer later in this judgment. On the 15th August, 1990 the deceased Bhavani set fire to herself and her 1-1/2 years old daughter at about 12.45 p.m. She had closed the door of her room and after pouring kerosene oil on herself and her child set herself ablaze. When she cried in pain her neighbours came to her rescue, got the door opened, and put off the fire. She was taken to the government hospital, Chirala along with child. Intimation was sent by the hospital authorities to the magistrate for recording the dying declaration of the deceased. On such request PW-13 the II additional munsif magistrate, Chirala visited the hospital at 3.05 p.m. and recorded the dying declaration of Bhavani which was exhibited at the trial as exhibit P-18. The dying declaration was recorded by him between 3.30 p.m. and 3.40 p.m. The said dying declaration is in question answer form and was recorded in the presence of the treating physician who certified that Bhavani was conscious when the dying declaration was recorded. The munsif magistrate read over the contents to the deceased in the presence of the doctor and on Bhavani admitting the statement to be correct, she affixed her thumb impression on the dying declaration.

5. In this dying declaration Bhavani (deceased) stated that due to unbearable harassment caused by her mother-in-law she had poured kerosene oil on her body and had set herself on fire at about 1.00 p.m. on that day. To a specific question she replied saying that none-else had set her on fire. It also appears that while recording the dying declaration the magistrate had taken care to remove all other persons from the room, except the doctor on duty.

6. There is another dying declaration on record exhibit P-19 which was recorded by head constable, Rasool Saheb, PW-15 only 5 minutes after the dying declaration was recorded by the munsif magistrate. According to head constable, Rasool Saheb, PW-15 he received intimation at about 3.00 p.m. on the date of occurrence from the government hospital and he immediately went to the hospital and recorded the statement of the deceased. The second dying declaration recorded by head constable, PW-15 is a detailed dying declaration in which Bhavani (deceased) has stated that she was a house wife married to the appellant three years ago and had a female child who was about 18 months old on the date of occurrence. Her husband and mother-in-law used to harass her and did not want her to speak or behave amicably with her relatives and used to beat her often. On 14.8.1990 her parents visited her and thereafter went away. After they had left, and on coming to know this fact, her husband harassed her. Due to the unbearable harassment meted out to her she was disappointed with her life and she closed the doors of her room in the absence of family members and after pouring kerosene oil on her body and on her child she set herself on fire which engulfed her and her child and both were badly burnt. On account of severe burns suffered by her she cried, hearing which her neighbours broke open the door and entered the house and extinguished the flames. She and her child were taken to the government hospital by them.

7. It will thus be seen that whereas in the first dying declaration the allegation made is only against the mother-in- law saying that she used to be harassed by her, in the second dying declaration she has given details relating to her parents visiting her on 14th August, 1990 and the harassment meted out to her by the appellant herein after he came to know of the fact that her parents had visited her. This was because her husband and mother-in-law did not want her to speak or behave amicably with her relatives. She was, therefore, disappointed with life and chose to commit suicide.

8. It is apparent that while in the first dying declaration there is only a general allegation against the mother-in-law, accused no.2, in the second dying declaration the allegation of harassment is against the husband as well as the mother-in-law and the immediate cause for the suicide was her being harassed by her husband, the appellant herein, after her parents had left. It cannot be disputed that the two dying declarations are not consistent with each other. The complicity of the appellant herein is disclosed only in the second dying declaration.

9. However, the High Court has not accepted the case of the prosecution so far as it relates to the offence under section 306 I.P.C. and no appeal has been preferred against the impugned judgment and order of the High Court acquitting the accused of the charge under section 306 I.P.C. The sole question, therefore, which arises for consideration is whether there is evidence to support the charge under section 498A.

10. The prosecution at the trial examined some members of the family of the deceased including her father, PW-1 and her uncles PWs-2 and 3. PW-4, Shyama Sundara Rao is a brother-in-law of PW-1, the father of the deceased. None of these witnesses have supported the case of the prosecution regarding torture and harassment of the deceased by her husband or mother-in-law. No doubt they have been declared hostile but their evidence does disclose the reason for the misunderstanding between the appellant and the deceased.

11. PW-1, in his deposition stated that after her marriage with the appellant his daughter Bhavani resided with the appellant and the relationship between them was cordial. His daughter, Bhavani (deceased) gave birth to a daughter and when her daughter was about 5 months old she came to his house because of some dispute with her husband, the appellant. According to PW-1, the accused was the only son of his parents. His elder sister died on 15.5.1987 leaving behind three children all below the age of 14 years. The husband of his deceased sister remarried and set up his family, but his three children from the first wife were left with the appellant and they used to reside in the same house where the appellant resided with his parents. This was objected to by deceased Bhavani and she had stated that she would not live with the appellant till he separated from his father and lived separately from them. She did not like that the children of her deceased sister-in-law should be brought up by the family members of her husband including her mother-in-law, accused no.2. According to the father of the deceased this was the reason for misunderstanding between the deceased and the appellant. He further stated that on 14th August, 1990 he had been informed by PW-4, that there was some misunderstanding between the appellant and his daughter and he had requested him to come and get the matter patched up. He had gone to the house of his daughter on 14.8.1990 and patched up their differences. On the next day, he came to know that his daughter had set herself on fire and that she had been admitted in a hospital. He denied having stated before the police that the accused were responsible for the death of his daughter. According to him the accused looked after the welfare of his daughter and she delivered a daughter and lived in the house of the appellant till the child was 5 months old. She had thereafter come to reside with him on account of some misunderstanding with her husband. The reason for the misunderstanding was the objection of his daughter to the upbringing of deceased sister-in-law's children by her husband's family. No accusation has been made by the father of the deceased to the effect that Bhavani was ever ill-treated or harassed by either the appellant or his mother-in-law or any other member of the family. PW-2, a brother of PW-1 has also deposed on the same lines as PW-1. In the deposition of PW-4 also there is no allegation that the deceased was ill-treated by her husband or members of his family. In fact, the learned trial judge noticed that except the two dying declarations, there was no other evidence before the court to prove that the deceased was treated with cruelty and harassment which led her to commit suicide. However, the trial court finding the two dying declarations to be consistent and supplemental to each other relied upon them and recorded the conviction of the appellant as well as his mother, accused no.2 under sections 498A and 306 I.P.C. Appellate court also upheld the judgment and order of the trial court. The High Court in revision, however, came to the conclusion that though the facts of this case prove commission of offence under section 498A I.P.C., the prosecution had failed to prove its case under section 306 I.P.C.

12. Having noticed the evidence on record and having noticed the inconsistency between the two dying declarations, we do not find it safe to base the conviction of the appellant on the basis of the second dying declaration. As noticed earlier, in the first dying declaration there is no mention about the appellant having treated the deceased with cruelty or of his having caused harassment to the deceased. In fact, his name does not find place in the relevant portion of the first dying declaration. The first dying declaration was recorded by a magistrate after taking all necessary precautions. The deceased was in a position to make a statement which was certified by the treating physician who was also present when the statement was recorded. Only 5 minutes thereafter another statement was recorded by the head constable and in that dying declaration allegations have been made against the appellant and fact stated relating to the immediate cause which led the deceased to commit suicide which are attributable to the appellant, though there is a statement that her mother-in-law also used to harass her.

13. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that there was no necessity for the head constable to record another dying declaration when the munsif magistrate had already recorded the dying declaration. In any event, the deceased did not in her first dying declaration accuse the appellant of having caused harassment to her, or having ill-treated her, and therefore there is no justification for convicting the appellant even for the offence under section 498A I.P.C.

14. We have earlier noticed the evidence examined by the prosecution in support of its case that the deceased was treated with cruelty by both the accused. However, the witnesses including the father of the deceased have not supported this case. In fact, the father of the deceased namely, PW-1, in his deposition stated that misunderstandings arose between his daughter and her husband on account of the fact that the three children of the deceased sister of the appellant were being brought up in the house of the appellant which was objected to by the deceased. If in those unfortunate circumstances the three children of the deceased sister of the appellant were being brought up in his family, one cannot blame the appellant or his parents for having shown compassion towards the children of his deceased sister. If that is what caused annoyance to the deceased, one cannot equate such conduct with cruelty or harassment. We also find no reason why on this aspect of the matter the father of the deceased should not speak the truth. In any event, he and his family members were the only persons who could have deposed about the treatment meted out to the deceased. All of them have denied the suggestion that the appellant or his mother-in-law treated the deceased with cruelty. The fact that these witnesses have been declared hostile by the prosecution, does not result in the automatic rejection of their evidence. Even the evidence of a hostile witness if it finds corroboration from the facts of the case may be taken into account while judging the guilt of an accused. In any event, if their evidence is kept out of consideration, there is no other evidence to prove the prosecution allegation of cruelty and harassment meted out to the deceased. Having regard to the inconsistency in the two dying declarations we do not find it safe to act solely on them to convict the appellant, and for that reason even accused no.2, the mother of the appellant who has since served out her sentence.

15. In the facts of this case we find that the prosecution has failed to prove the commission of the offence under section 498A I.P.C. Accordingly, we allow this appeal and acquit the appellant of the charge under section 498A I.P.C. Since the case of accused no.2 Smt. Gangamamba, mother of the appellant herein also stands of the same footing, we also record an order of acquittal in her favour, even though her special leave petition was dismissed and she has undergone the sentence imposed against her. This appeal is accordingly allowed. The bail bonds furnished by the appellant are discharged.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2010 (9) SCC 73
APPEARANCES
Mr. R.P. Gupta, Senior Advocate, Mr. M.P. Singh and Mr. Rajeev Kumar Bansal, Advocates, with him for the Appellants.
Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, Advocate, for the Respondent.
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Sections 498A, 304B - Evidence Act, 1872, Sections 113A, 113B - Dowry death - Presumption when death occurs within seven years of marriage - Evidence of only mother and brother of deceased - Allegations of beating as no dowry received from family of deceased - Marriage was a community marriage due to poverty of couple - Only bald statements that victim was subjected to cruelty and harassment - Nothing to show if she was subjected to such treatment prior to her committing suicide. Held that no case can be made out as there is insufficient evidence. Benefit of doubt given. Appeal allowed. Anand Kumar's case [JT 2009 (2) SC 662] distinguished.
HELD
In order to hold an accused guilty of an offence under Section 304B IPC, it has to be shown that apart from the fact that the woman died on account of burn or bodily injury, otherwise than under normal circumstances, within 7 years of her marriage, it has also to be shown that soon before her death, she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry. Only then would such death be called "dowry death" and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused the death of the woman concerned. (Para 15)

In order to bring home a conviction under Section 304B IPC, it will not be sufficient to only lead evidence showing that cruelty or harassment had been meted out to the victim, but that such treatment was in connection with the demand for dowry. In our view, the prosecution in this case has failed to fully satisfy the requirements of both Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1872 and Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code. (Para 17)

No case can be made out on the ground of insufficient evidence against the Appellants for conviction under Sections 498A and 304B IPC. (Para 18)

We are inclined to allow the benefit of doubt to the Appellants having particular regard to the fact that except for certain bald statements made by PWs.1 and 3 alleging that the victim had been subjected to cruelty and harassment prior to her death, there is no other evidence to prove that the victim committed suicide on account of cruelty and harassment to which she was subjected just prior to her death. (Para 14)

CASES REFERRED
1.Anand Kumar v. State of M.P. [JT 2009 (2) SC 662] (Para 12)

2.Biswajit Halder @ Babu Halder & Ors. v. State of W.B. [JT 2007 (5) SC 360] (Para 7)

3.Shri Gopal & Anr. v. Subhash & Ors. [JT 2004 (2) SC 158] (Para 8)

ALTAMAS KABIR, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 28th April, 2009, passed by Jabalpur Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court, dismissing Criminal Appeal No.103 of 2000, which had been directed against the judgment of conviction and sentence under Section 498A and Section 304B Indian Penal Code. By the said judgment, the learned Sessions Judge had sentenced the Appellants to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 months under Section 498A IPC and to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- and in default of payment of such fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further period of 3 years. Upon consideration of the materials on record, the High Court was of the view that the prosecution had proved its case beyond all reasonable doubts and that the appeal, therefore, deserved to be dismissed.

3. Appearing in support of the appeal, Mr. R.P. Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, contended that both the Courts below had erred in convicting the Appellants on the basis of evidence on record. Mr. Gupta submitted that in the absence of any evidence to prove the charges under Sections 304B and 498A IPC, the trial Court, as also the High Court, had erred in merely relying on the presumption available under Section 304B regarding the death of a woman by any burn or bodily injury or otherwise than under normal circumstances, within 7 years of her marriage, in coming to a conclusion that there would be a natural inference in such circumstance under Section 113A and 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, that the accused persons had caused the death of Kripa Bai by torturing her physically and mentally so as to drive the deceased to commit suicide. Mr. Gupta submitted that both the Courts below appear to have overlooked the fact that in order to prove a case of dowry death it would have to be shown that in addition to the fact that the death took place otherwise than in normal circumstances within 7 years of marriage, that soon before her death, the wife was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry. It was pointed out by Mr. Gupta that in the explanation to Sub-Section (1) of Section 304B it had been mentioned that for the purpose of the said Sub-Section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as under Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.

4. Mr. Gupta also submitted that the provisions of Section 113A of the Indian Evidence Act were not applicable in this case since no case for abetment of suicide by the husband or any of the husband's relatives had been alleged. On the other hand, the case sought to be made out is one under Section 113B relating to presumption as to dowry death. Mr. Gupta submitted that the provisions in Section 113B relating to presumption as to dowry death are similar to that of Section 304B IPC. He urged that in order to arrive at the presumption of dowry death, it would have to be shown by the prosecution that soon before her death, such woman had been subjected to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, which would lead to a presumption that such person caused the dowry death.

5. Mr. Gupta submitted that in the instant case, the Appellants had not been convicted under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, but under Section 304B and 498A IPC. Mr. Gupta submitted that the prosecution had not established that prior to the death of the victim Kripa Bai, she had been either subjected to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, particularly, when the Appellants had not been convicted under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.

6. It was pointed out that the only evidence on which reliance had been placed both by the trial Court, as well as the High Court, for convicting the Appellants, was the evidence of Vimla Bai, PW.1, the mother of the deceased and Radheshyam, PW.3, the brother of the deceased. In fact, the prosecution story was that since no dowry had been received from the family of the victim, she had been beaten and treated with cruelty. There is no other evidence regarding the physical and mental torture which the deceased was alleged to have been subjected to. Mr. Gupta urged that the marriage of the Appellant No.1 with the deceased was performed as part of a community marriage being celebrated on account of the poverty of couples who could not otherwise meet the expenses of marriage and that even the few utensils which were given at the time of such community marriage were given by the persons who had organized such marriages.

7. Mr. Gupta submitted that the evidence in this case was wholly insufficient to even suggest that the victim had been subjected to cruelty or harassment which was sufficient to compel her to commit suicide. In support of his submissions, Mr. Gupta firstly referred to the decision of this Court in Biswajit Halder @ Babu Halder & Ors. v. State of W.B. [JT 2007 (5) SC 360 : 2008 (1) SCC 202], wherein, in facts which were very similar, it was held that there was practically no evidence to show that there was any cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, the demands of dowry. There was also no finding in that regard. It was further observed that this deficiency in evidence proved fatal for the prosecution case and even otherwise mere evidence of cruelty and harassment was not sufficient to attract Section 304B IPC. It had to be shown in addition to that such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with, demand of dowry. Mr. Gupta urged that since the Appellants had not been convicted under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, the charge under Section 304B would also fail since the same was linked with the question of cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, the demand for dowry.

8. Mr. Gupta then urged that even the evidence of PW.3, Radheshyam, and also that of PW.2, Ashok Kumar, were full of omissions as to their statements before the police authorities and their evidence during the trial. Mr. Gupta submitted that such omissions were also fatal to the prosecution case since the same was mere embellishment and improvement of the evidence led by the prosecution. In this regard, Mr. Gupta referred to the decision of this Court in Shri Gopal & Anr. v. Subhash & Ors. [JT 2004 (2) SC 158 : 2004 (13) SCC 174]. In the said decision, while dealing with statements made by prosecution witnesses under Section 162 Cr.P.C. and omissions made during their evidence in Courts, this Court held that the same would amount to contradiction and their evidence on such point would not, therefore, be acceptable.

9. Mr. Gupta urged that both the trial Court, as well as the High Court, did not take into consideration any of the aforesaid matters while convicting the Appellants under Sections 304B and 498A IPC. Mr. Gupta urged that in such circumstances, the judgment and order of the trial Court, as well as that of the High Court, affirming the said judgment, are liable to be set aside.

10. Opposing the submissions made by Mr. R.P. Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned Advocate appearing for the State of Madhya Pradesh, submitted that the trial Court had considered the evidence of Vimla Bai, PW.1, the mother of the deceased and Radheshyam, PW.3, the brother of the deceased, in coming to a finding that their evidence was sufficient to bring home the guilt of the Appellants under Sections 498A and 304B IPC.

11. Ms. Makhija also reiterated the submissions which had been made before the trial Court regarding the presumption that was to be drawn both under Section 304B IPC, as also under Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, having regard to the fact that Kripa Bai had committed suicide within 7 years of her marriage. Ms. Makhija submitted that once it was found that by their actions the Appellants had driven Kripa Bai to commit suicide, the provisions of Section 304B IPC were immediately attracted and the Appellants, therefore, had been rightly convicted by the trial Court under Sections 498A and 304B IPC. Ms. Makhija urged that the evidence of PWs.1 and 3 were sufficient to meet the requirements of both Sections 113B of the Indian Evidence Act and Section 304B IPC.

12. Ms. Makhija then contended that as had been laid down by this Court in the case of Anand Kumar v. State of M.P. [JT 2009 (2) SC 662 : 2009 (3) SCC 799], in order to counter the presumption available under Section 113B, which is relatable to Section 304-B, a heavy burden has been shifted on to the accused to prove his innocence. Having regard to the language of Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, which indicates that when a question arises as to whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by such other person or in connection with any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused such dowry death. Ms. Makhija urged that the aforesaid wording of Section 113B of Evidence Act and the use of the expression "shall" would clearly indicate that the Court shall presume such death as dowry death provided the conditions in Section 113-B were satisfied and it would then be for the accused to prove otherwise.

13. Ms. Makhija, thereupon, urged that the order of conviction passed by the trial Court holding the Appellants guilty under Sections 498A and 304B IPC, confirmed by the High Court, did not warrant any interference by this Court.

14. Having carefully considered the submissions made on behalf of the respective parties, we are inclined to allow the benefit of doubt to the Appellants having particular regard to the fact that except for certain bald statements made by PWs.1 and 3 alleging that the victim had been subjected to cruelty and harassment prior to her death, there is no other evidence to prove that the victim committed suicide on account of cruelty and harassment to which she was subjected just prior to her death, which, in fact, are the ingredients of the evidence to be led in respect of Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, in order to bring home the guilt against an accused under Section 304B IPC.

15. As has been mentioned hereinbefore, in order to hold an accused guilty of an offence under Section 304B IPC, it has to be shown that apart from the fact that the woman died on account of burn or bodily injury, otherwise than under normal circumstances, within 7 years of her marriage, it has also to be shown that soon before her death, she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry. Only then would such death be called "dowry death" and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused the death of the woman concerned.

16. In this case, one other aspect has to be kept in mind, namely, that no charges were framed against the Appellants under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 and the evidence led in order to prove the same for the purposes of Section 304B IPC was related to a demand for a fan only.

17. The decision cited by Mr. R.P. Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, in Biswajit Halder's case (supra) was rendered in almost similar circumstances. In order to bring home a conviction under Section 304B IPC, it will not be sufficient to only lead evidence showing that cruelty or harassment had been meted out to the victim, but that such treatment was in connection with the demand for dowry. In our view, the prosecution in this case has failed to fully satisfy the requirements of both Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1872 and Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code.

18. Accordingly, we are unable to agree with the views expressed both by the trial Court, as well as the High Court, and we are of the view that no case can be made out on the ground of insufficient evidence against the Appellants for conviction under Sections 498A and 304B IPC. The decision cited by Ms. Makhija in Anand Kumar's case (supra) deals with the proposition of shifting of onus of the burden of proof relating to the presumption which the Court is to draw under Section 113B of the Evidence Act and does not help the case of the State in a situation where there is no material to presume that an offence under Section 304B IPC had been committed.

19. In that view of the matter, we allow the Appeal and set aside the judgment of the trial Court convicting and sentencing the Appellants of offences alleged to have been committed under Sections 498A and 304B IPC. The judgment of the High Court impugned in the instant Appeal is also set aside. In the event, the Appellants are on bail, they shall be discharged from their bail bonds, and, in the event they are in custody, they should be released forthwith.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS 
Penal Code, 1860 
Sections 498A, 306, 304B Conviction under All five members of in-laws" family convicted Husband of deceased has undergone his sentence - Mother-in-law has died Appellants who are sisters and brother of husband are in jail for 4 years and two months - Whether omnibus allegations against all the family members should not be taken at face value No independent corroboration against such allegations No individual role of harassment assigned to appellants. Held possibility of appellants having been named by way of exaggeration cannot be ruled out. Brothers and sisters do not stand on the same footing having regard to nature of their relationship. They deserve benefit of doubt. Conviction and sentence under Section 304B set aside. Kans Raj"s [JT 2000 (5) SC 223] case relied.
HELD
We do not find any ground to interfere with the view taken by the courts below that the deceased was subjected to harassment on account of non-fulfillment of dowry demand, we do find merit in the submission that possibility of naming all the family members by way of exaggeration is not ruled out. (Para 8)

The Court has, thus, to be careful in summoning distant relatives without there being specific material. Only the husband, his parents or at best close family members may be expected to demand dowry or to harass the wife but not distant relations, unless there is tangible material to support allegations made against such distant relations. Mere naming of distant relations is not enough to summon them in absence of any specific role and material to support such role. (Para 8.1)

The Court has to adopt pragmatic view and when a girl dies an unnatural death, allegation of demand of dowry or harassment which follows cannot be weighed in golden scales. At the same time, omnibus allegation against all family members particularly against brothers and sisters and other relatives do not stand on same footing as husband and parents. In such case, apart from general allegation of demand of dowry court has to be satisfied that harassment was also caused by all the named members. (Para 11)

CASES REFERRED
1.Amar Singh v. State of Rajasthan [JT 2010 (8) SC 99] (Para 10) 

2.Raja Lal Singh v. State of Jharkhand [JT 2007 (7) SC 77] (Para 9) 

3.Kans Raj v. State of Punjab & Ors. [JT 2000 (5) SC 223] (Para 5)

ADARSH KUMAR GOEL, J. 

1. The appellants stand convicted under Sections 498A, 306 and 304B of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and sentenced to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment (RI) for 10 years and to pay fine of Rs.5000/-. In default, to undergo further imprisonment for two years. They also stand sentenced to suffer RI for three years and to pay fine of Rs.1000/- and in default to suffer further imprisonment for three months under Sections 498A and 306 IPC. 

2. The deceased Shanti Roy was married to Sekhar Roy on 20th February, 1994. According to the prosecution, Sekhar Roy, his mother, two sisters and brother raised a demand of Rs.5000/- and since the said demand was not fulfilled, Shanti Roy was harassed and even kept without food. On 31st July, 1995, she committed suicide by pouring kerosene and setting herself on fire. She was pregnant carrying eight months old foetus. Chittaranjan Saha (PW1), brother of the deceased lodged First Information Report. After conducting investigation, appellants Monju Roy, Anju Roy, sisters of Sekhar Roy, Tulshi Roy, brother of Sekhar Roy, Sumitra Roy, mother of Sekhar Roy and Sekhar Roy, husband of the deceased were sent up for trial. Sumitra Roy died on 27th August, 2001 during pendency of the trial. 

3. The prosecution examined 17 witnesses and also produced documents in support of its case. The witnesses examined included brother of the deceased PW 5 and mother of the deceased PW 14 to prove that the deceased was harassed by demand of dowry. Accepting the evidence, the trial court convicted and sentenced the three appellants as mentioned above and also Sekhar Roy who has not preferred appeal and is said to have undergone the sentence awarded to him. The High Court upheld the conviction and sentence with the modification that instead of life imprisonment under Section 304B awarded by the trial court, sentence of RI for ten years was awarded. 

4. We have heard learned counsel for the appellants Shri Pijush K. Roy and Shri Kabir S. Bose for the State of West Bengal and with their assistance have gone through the record. 

5. Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that omnibus allegation against all the family members could not be taken at the face value, having regard to the well known tendency of naming all the family members by the family of an unfortunate victim. In such circumstances, the court may be cautious in accepting such omnibus allegations against all the family members unless there is an independent corroboration of such allegation. He submitted that in the present case, the allegation is that all the five family members raised a demand of Rs.5000/- and beyond stating that all the family members harassed her, no individual role in harassment has been specified. The benefit of dowry could go either to the husband or at best his mother and not to the siblings who are alleged to have joined in such demand. There is no independent corroboration of the allegation as such allegation has been made for the first time in the FIR. The allegation is based on the version given to the witnesses three months after the marriage or thereafter, though it is stated that the witness continued to receive information about such demand even thereafter upto 15-20 days prior to the occurrence. He submitted that mother-in-law of the deceased has already died and husband of the deceased has undergone the sentence. The appellants who are two sisters and one brother of the husband of the deceased have been in custody for more than four years and two months. The possibility of exaggeration about the number of family members who raised demand of dowry was not ruled out. Even if demand was jointly made, the appellants have not been assigned any role in harassment in absence of which, presumption under Section 113B of the Evidence Act could not be raised against them. Reliance has been placed on observations of this Court in Kans Raj v. State of Punjab & Ors. [JT 2000 (5) SC 223 : 2000 (5) SCC 207]. 

6. Learned counsel for the State opposed the above submission and pointed out that the deceased was pregnant for eight months and would not have committed suicide within two years of marriage unless the harassment for dowry had been caused. He submitted that there is no reason to disbelieve the version of close relatives of the deceased that dowry was demanded by all the family members and the demand continued till her death. All the members have been specifically named. The death having taken place within seven years of marriage in circumstances other than normal, statutory presumption under Section 304B clearly arises and the courts below were justified in convicting and sentencing the appellants. 

7. We have given serious thought to the question raised about the possibility of exaggeration in prosecution version in implicating all the family members. 

8. While we do not find any ground to interfere with the view taken by the courts below that the deceased was subjected to harassment on account of non-fulfillment of dowry demand, we do find merit in the submission that possibility of naming all the family members by way of exaggeration is not ruled out. In Kans Raj, this Court observed: 

5A tendency has, however, developed for roping in all relations of the in-laws of the deceased wives in the matters of dowry deaths which, if not discouraged, is likely to affect the case of the prosecution even against the real culprits. In their over enthusiasm and anxiety to seek conviction for maximum people, the parents of the deceased have been found to be making efforts for involving other relations which ultimately weaken the case of the prosecution even against the real accused as appears to have happened in the instant case. 

8.1. The Court has, thus, to be careful in summoning distant relatives without there being specific material. Only the husband, his parents or at best close family members may be expected to demand dowry or to harass the wife but not distant relations, unless there is tangible material to support allegations made against such distant relations. Mere naming of distant relations is not enough to summon them in absence of any specific role and material to support such role. 

9. In Raja Lal Singh v. State of Jharkhand [JT 2007 (7) SC 77 : 2007 (15) SCC 415], it was observed: 

14. No doubt, some of the witnesses e.g. PW 5 Dashrath Singh, who is the father of the deceased Gayatri, and PW 3 Santosh Kr. Singh, brother of the deceased, have stated that the deceased Gayatri told them that dowry was demanded by not only Raja Lal Singh, but also the appellants Pradip Singh and his wife Sanjana Devi, but we are of the opinion that it is possible that the names of Pradip Singh and Sanjana Devi have been introduced only to spread the net wide as often happens in cases like under Sections 498-A and 394 IPC, as has been observed in several decisions of this Court e.g. in Kamesh Panjiyar v. State of Bihar [2005 (2) SCC 388], etc. Hence, we allow the appeal of Pradip Singh and Sanjana Devi and set aside the impugned judgments of the High Court and the trial court insofar as it relates to them and we direct that they be released forthwith unless required in connection with some other case. 

10. Moreover, ingredient of offence under Section 304B is not mere demand of dowry but cruelty or harassment for or in connection with demand of dowry. In Amar Singh v. State of Rajasthan [JT 2010 (8) SC 99 : 2010 (9) SCC 64], it was observed: 

29. .. What is punishable under Section 498-A or Section 304-B IPC is the act of cruelty or harassment by the husband or the relative of the husband on the woman. It will be also clear from Section 113-B of the Evidence Act that only when it is shown that soon before her death a woman has been subjected by any person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death within the meaning of Section 304-B IPC. The act of subjecting a woman to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry by the accused, therefore, must be established by the prosecution for the court to presume that the accused has caused the dowry death. 

11. The Court has to adopt pragmatic view and when a girl dies an unnatural death, allegation of demand of dowry or harassment which follows cannot be weighed in golden scales. At the same time, omnibus allegation against all family members particularly against brothers and sisters and other relatives do not stand on same footing as husband and parents. In such case, apart from general allegation of demand of dowry court has to be satisfied that harassment was also caused by all the named members. 

12. In the facts and circumstances of the present case, even if it is accepted that the appellants were involved in raising the demand for dowry there is material that the appellants harassed the victim resulting in her death. Normally, it is the husband or parents of the husband who may be benefitted by the dowry and may be in a position to harass and not all other relatives, though no hard and fast rule can be laid down in that regard. It is also true that till such an unfortunate event takes place, the family members may not disclose the demand of dowry being a private matter and under the hope that the relationship of the couple may improve. However, having regard to the nature of their relationships, there being possibility of the appellants having been named by way of exaggeration, we are of the view that the appellants deserve to be given benefit of doubt in that regard in the facts of the present case. 

13. Accordingly, we allow this appeal, set aside the conviction and sentence of the appellants under Section 304B IPC without interfering with conviction and sentence under other heads. Since the appellants are said to have already undergone the sentence awarded for other charges which may be verified, they may be released from custody forthwith unless required in any other case.

**********
HEADNOTE
1.Hira Lal & Others v. State (Govt. of NCT), Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 195] (Para 11)


SUDHANSU JYOTI MUKHOPADHAYA,J

1. This appeal is directed against judgment dated 9th December, 2009 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No. 471-SB of 1999 whereby the High Court confirmed the judgment and order dated 23rd April, 1999 rendered by Additional Sessions Judge, Mansa in Sessions Case No.14 of 12th May, 1997. The Sessions Court by the said judgment convicted the appellant u/s 304-B IPC and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 10 years and to pay fine of Rs.1000/- , in default of payment of fine, to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 2 months.

2. Apart from the appellant other family members, namely, Kuldip Singh, Darshana Devi and Parveen kaur were also accused before the Trial Court. They were acquitted of the charges leveled against them against which no appeal was filed by the State. Paramjit Kaur and Swaranjit Kaur were two other accused who were juvenile therefore their cases were separated.

3. The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that Amarjit Kaur (deceased) was married to accused-Davinder Singh (appellant herein) 6/7 months before the date of occurrence i.e. 3rd March, 1997. Teja Singh son of Bachittar Singh was the mediator in arranging the marriage. At the time of marriage, sufficient dowry was given by the parents of Amarjit Kaur as per their status, but after the marriage in-laws of Amarjit Kaur started torturing/coercing her to bring more dowry. Jaswinder Singh-complainant-brother of Amarjit Kaur and Teja Singh-mediator had requested the in-laws of Amarjit Kaur not to harass and torture her for dowry but they continued to maltreat and harass the deceased.

3.1 On 9.2.1997, marriage of Jaswinder Singh, complainant, was solemnized. Deceased and her husband Davinder Singh had attended the marriage. After marriage, Davinder Singh demanded Rs.20,000/- from the complainant on the ground that Jaswinder Singh was given more dowry than him. To settle deceased in her in-laws' house, Jaswinder Singh borrowed a sum of Rs.20,000/- and gave the amount to the appellant. But in-laws of the deceased were not satisfied and they continued to demand more dowry.

3.2 On 2.3.1997, deceased telephonically informed Jaswinder Singh that her in- laws were torturing and harassing her in connection with dowry. As per message, Jaswinder Singh and his maternal uncle Bhola Singh went to Budhlada to enquire about the welfare of deceased. The deceased informed them that she was being harassed for more dowry by her in-laws. They came back by saying that on the next day, they will come back with some respectable person to settle the dispute.

3.3 On 3.3.1997 at about 5.30 PM, Jaswinder Singh, his maternal uncle Bhola Singh and Teja Singh went to the house of accused-Davinder Singh. When they were near the gate of the house, then they heard shrieks and screams from the roof. After entering the house when they were going to the roof of the house, they found Darshana Devi saying that Amarjit Kaur should not be spared. She should be finished. All of them went to the roof of the house and then noticed Kuldip Singh, accused-Davinder Singh, Darshana Devi, Parveen Kaur, Paramjit Kaur and Swaranjit Kaur coming to the ground through staircase. The dead body of Amarjit Kaur was found in the bathroom in a burnt condition. Plastic cane and match box were found near the dead body. It is alleged that in-laws of Amarjit Kaur has murdered her by setting her on fire. Teja Singh was deputed to guard the dead body, when Jaswinder Singh and Bhola Singh went to lodge report. Rupinder Singh, Sub Inspector met the complainant near the crossing of Civil Hospital, Budhalda, where statement of Jaswinder Singh (Ex.P.D.) was recorded. After making endorsement, statement was forwarded to the Police Station, on the basis of which, formal FIR was registered.

3.4 On 7.3.1997, accused were arrested. After completion of investigation, challans was presented. Accused were charged u/s 304-B/149 IPC to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

4. The prosecution, in support of its case, examined four witnesses. Documentary evidences were also exhibited. Defence also examined seven witnesses. After closure of the prosecution evidence, statements of accused were recoded u/s 313 Cr.PC. Accused denied all the prosecution allegations and pleaded to be innocent. Defence version of the accused-appellant was that he is impotent and on account of this reason, Amarjit Kaur was under depression. Amarjit Kaur was also harassed by her step mother. Because of these reasons, she has committed suicide. Similar plea has been taken by the counsel for the appellant to assail the impugned judgment.

5. PW-2 - Jaswinder Singh brother of the deceased stated that Amarjit Kaur got married with appellant-Davinder Singh in July, 1996. Kuldeep Singh, Darshana Devi and Parveen are respectively father, mother and sister of the appellant. Paramjit Kaur and Swaranjit Kaur are also sisters of the appellant. Teja Singh was mediator of marriage of Amarjit Kaur with Davinder Singh. They had spent on marriage of deceased more than their capacity. The relations of deceased with her husband and in laws remained cordial for about two months. Thereafter her in-laws started ill-treating her on one pretext or the other that her parents had not given scooter and cloths given were not upto mark. The accused were demanding more dowry. He along with his maternal uncle PW-3 Bhola Singh had gone once or twice to house of her in-laws and requested them that since they are poor people and they cannot afford more dowry. But appellant and his family did not agree. PW-2's marriage took place on 9.2.1997 Davinder Singh and Amarjit Kaur attended his marriage. After his marriage accused-Davinder Singh stated that complainant had been given more dowry than him and demanded money from complainant. The complainant took Rs.20,000/- from his uncle and gave it to accused-Davinder Singh. However, the appellant was not satisfied and again started demanding more dowry. On 2.3.1997, he received telephone call from his sister that she is being maltreated by her in-laws on account of dowry. Then PW-2 took his maternal uncle from Goniana and came to Budhlada in the house of the accused. The accused demanded more money from the complainant. Then PW-2 told the accused that he will meet them the next day. On 3.3.1997, PW-2 along with his maternal uncle Bhola Singh and mediator Teja Singh reached the house of the accused. When they reached at the gate of the house, they heard shrieks upstairs. When they were just entering the gate, mother-in-law of the deceased shouted that deceased should be finished today. Then they went upstairs. When they went on roof Kuldeep Singh, Davinder Singh, Darshana Devi, Parveen Kaur, Swaranjit Kaur and Paramjit Kaur came down running. They found Amarjit Kaur lying dead with burns in bathroom. One plastic cane and match box were lying near to her dead body. Teja Singh was left to guard dead body he and his uncle went to the Police Station. Police met them near the Hospital where his statement Ex.PD was recorded. Thereafter the Police came to the house of accused and took into possession plastic cane Ex.P3, match box Ex.P4, and ash wrapped in cloth Ex.P5 vide memo P.E. which was attested by him. During the cross examination, PW-2 denied the suggestion that after his marriage he did not visit Budhlada. He stated that visited there twice or thrice. However, he could not give the exact date of telephone call but stated that she had given call on 10-11 AM and on the same day of receiving the telephone he and his uncle went to Budhlada. He denied the suggestion that the accused had not demanded dowry prior to bhog ceremony of his father.

6. PW-3 Bhola Singh maternal uncle of Amarjit Kaur stated that Amarjit Kaur was married with accused-Davinder Singh about seven months prior to her death. Accused-Davinder Singh used to demand motor cycle as dowry. The in-laws of deceased used to maltreat her. On 2.3.1997 he and his sister's son (PW-2- complainant) came to the house of the accused at Budhlada to see Amarjit Kaur, She told them that her in-laws are maltreating her. They left the house telling that they will come again with some wise person. They again went on 3.3.1997 along with Teja Singh to the house of the accused at Budhlada. At the gate, they heard shrieks from the roof of the house. Then they went running upstairs. When they went upwards, they saw Amarjit Kaur lying dead in bathroom with burns all over the body. Plastic cane and match box were found lying near the dead-body. The matter was reported to the Police Station. The Police met them in front of Hospital. During the cross-examination PW-3 was not in a position to given the exact details of the neighbours of the Devinder Singh. However, for not giving such details of the neighbours, the statement of PW-3 cannot be held to be untrustworthy.

7. PW-1 Dr. Kashmir Singh, had conducted the post mortem examination. He reported that death was due to asphyxia as a result of 95% to 100% burns which were ante mortem in nature and was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. The probable duration of time that elapsed between the injuries and death was immediate and between death and the postmortem was within 24 hours. The Ex. P.A. is the copy of the Post Mortem Report.

8. PW-4 Rupinder Kumar, Sub Inspector is the investigating officer. He also deposed about recovery of plastic cane and match box from the house of the accused.

9. Section 304B IPC relates to dowry death and reads as follows:

"304B. Dowry death.- (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2)Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

10. For the purpose of the said Section, a presumption can be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(a) Death of woman has been caused by burns or bodily injury or not under normal circumstances.

(b) The said death have occurred within seven years of her marriage

(c) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(d) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry and

(e) She was meted out with such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death.

In this connection, we may refer this Court decision in Kaliaperumal v. State of Tamil Nadu [AIR 2003 SC 3828].

11. In the case of Hira Lal & Others v. State (Govt. of NCT), Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 195 : 2003 (8) SCC 80], this Court considered the expression "before death" used in the Section 304B IPC and Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act which reads as under:

"8. Section 304-B IPC which deals with dowry death, reads as follows:

"304-B. Dowry death.-(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called 'dowry death', and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-section, 'dowry' shall have the same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

The provision has application when death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relatives of her husband for, or in connection with any demand for dowry. In order to attract application of Section 304-B IPC, the essential ingredients are as follows:

(i) The death of a woman should be caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under a normal circumstance.

(ii) Such a death should have occurred within seven years of her marriage.

(iii) She must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband.

(iv) Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with demand of dowry.

(v) Such cruelty or harassment is shown to have been meted out to the woman soon before her death.

Section 113-B of the Evidence Act is also relevant for the case at hand. Both Section 304-B IPC and Section 113-B of the Evidence Act were inserted as noted earlier by Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act 43 of 1986 with a view to combat the increasing menace of dowry deaths. Section 113-B reads as follows:

"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.-When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, 'dowry death' shall have the same meaning as in Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

The necessity for insertion of the two provisions has been amply analysed by the Law Commission of India in its 21st Report dated 10-8-1988 on "Dowry Deaths and Law Reform". Keeping in view the impediment in the pre-existing law in securing evidence to prove dowry-related deaths, the legislature thought it wise to insert a provision relating to presumption of dowry death on proof of certain essentials. It is in this background that presumptive Section 113-B in the Evidence Act has been inserted. As per the definition of "dowry death" in Section 304-B IPC and the wording in the presumptive Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, one of the essential ingredients, amongst others, in both the provisions is that the woman concerned must have been "soon before her death" subjected to cruelty or harassment "for or in connection with the demand of dowry". Presumption under Section 113-B is a presumption of law. On proof of the essentials mentioned therein, it becomes obligatory on the court to raise a presumption that the accused caused the dowry death. The presumption shall be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(1) The question before the court must be whether the accused has committed the dowry death of the woman. (This means that the presumption can be raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence under Section 304-B IPC.)

(2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for or in connection with any demand for dowry.

(4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death."

12. In the present case, from the statements of PW-2 and PW-3 it is clear that the death took place within seven months of marriage. Admittedly, death of the deceased was due to burn i.e. not in normal circumstances. We have to see now whether the remaining ingredients are satisfied looking into the evidence on record.

13. The statements of the PW-2 and PW-3 are specific as they were eye witnesses. In their statements they specifically stated about the harassment in connection with demand of dowry. Deceased died within seven months of marriage. She also telephonically complained about harassment. The Prosecution thus proved that there was harassment in connection with dowry soon before death of the victim.

14. In view of the evidence on record, as discussed above, we hold that the prosecution was successful to prove the ingredients of Section 304-B IPC. The Trial Court rightly presumed that the accused had caused the dowry death of the victim.

15. We find no merit in this appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed. The appellant is directed to be taken into custody forthwith to serve remainder period of sentence. His bail bonds stand cancelled.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2014 AIR (SC) 2694
2014 (7) SCC 395
APPEARANCES
Mr. K.K. Mohan, Advocate, for the Appellant.
Mr. Anil Kaushik, Mr. Kamal Mohan Gupta, Advocates, for the Respondent.
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Evidence Act, 1872
Sections 32(1), 3, 113B - Penal Code, 1860, Sections 304B, 498A - Dying declaration - Two dying declarations - Dowry death - Appreciation - CJM requested to record statement of deceased - On reaching hospital, obtained fitness certificate from doctor - Statement recorded - Read out to victim, who put her thumb-mark on it - Further certification that victim remained fit to make statement - When asked to thumb-mark her statement, victim desired to make truthful statement - In first statement alleged about bursting of stove - While desiring to make statement again, she told that first statement was tutored by her husband - Second statement recorded at the same time - Clearly implicating husband for demanding dowry and setting her on fire. Held that second part of the declaration inspires confidence and first part was tutored one. (Paras 10, 11)

Sections 3, 32(1) - Penal Code, 1860, Sections 304B, 498A - Evidence - Appreciation - Dowry death - Mother of deceased stated about deceased having told her about quarrel in house due to demand of Rs. 1 lac - Deceased had also sent a letter demanding Rs. 5,000/- to her father - Dying declaration by victim - Clear statement that he would bring her to death if demand of Rs. 1 lac is not met - Earlier also he had tried to hang her - On day of incident, sprinkled oil on her clothes when she was in bathroom and set her on fire - First part of statement alleged to be tutored by her husband. Held that there was demand of dowry. Deceased had no reason to implicate accused. Although he gave blood to save her but it was too late. Hira Lal's [JT 2003 (6) SC 195] case relied upon. Further held that offences stand proved as there was cruelty and dowry demand.
HELD
Usha Devi (PW-6), mother of the deceased-Manju stated that Manju had told her that there was a quarrel in the family because the accused had been making a demand of Rs. One lakh for running a piggery farm. Manju had also sent a letter to her father making a demand of Rs.5,000/-. Letter is Ex.PJ. (Para 14)

Sapattar Singh (PW-8), father of the deceased has also deposed with regard to the demand of the appellant. (Para 15)

The deceased in the dying declaration stated that her husband had stated that he would hang her to death if his demand for Rs.1 lakh is not met by her parents and on 1st March, 1996, her husband tried to hang her. The appellant had initially tried to set her on fire during the night and when in the morning at 5.30 a.m. she went to bathroom he sprinkled the oil on the clothes from her back side and set her on fire. She categorically stated that earlier part of the statement was made at the instigation of her husband. The deceased had no reason to falsely implicate her husband particularly when she had suffered from burn injury. (Para 15)

From the aforesaid, evidence of Sapattar Singh (PW-8) and dying declaration, we find that there was a demand of dowry and harassment soon before the death. (Para 16)

Marriage took place on 20th June, 1995. Manju, wife of the accused Pradeep Kumar got burnt on 1st March, 1996 and died on 12th March, 1996 within nine months of her marriage. Death of Manju was caused by burns i.e. otherwise than under normal circumstances. It has already been seen that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty and harassment in connection with demand of dowry. All the five ingredients were proved by the prosecution. Under Section 113-B of the Evidence Act when a question arises whether a person committed dowry death and it is proved that the death of woman took place within seven years of marriage; such death took place not under normal circumstances and soon before the death deceased was subjected to cruelty or harassment by such person for or in connection with any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death. (Para 19)

CASES REFERRED
1.Hira Lal & Others v. State (Govt. of NCT), Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 195] (Para 18)

SUDHANSU JYOTI MUKHOPADHAYA, J.

1. This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 3rd February, 2010, passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in CRA No.909-SB of 1997. By the impugned common judgment the High Court dismissed the revision application preferred by the appellant and affirmed the conviction and sentence for the offence punishable under Section 498-A and 304-B IPC passed by the Sessions Judge, Karnal vide judgment dated 1st August, 1997.

2. The case of the prosecution is that Manju alias Uma Devi had been married to the accused Pradeep Kumar on 20th June, 1995. On 1st March, 1996 she received burn injuries and was got admitted in the Medical College Hospital, Rohtak. On 2nd March, 1996, she made her dying declaration before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Rohtak. In the first part of the said dying declaration she asserted that it was a case of accident, whereas in the latter part she alleged that her husband had been pressing to fetch a sum of Rs. One lakh from her parents and had been threatening to kill her if she did not bring the money. She also alleged that around 5.30 a.m. on 1st March, 1996 her husband doused her in kerosene from behind and set her on fire and later on he tried to save her when she raised alarm and on doing so his hands got burnt.

2.1. On the basis of this statement, First Information Report was recorded against the accused. The matter was investigated. On 12th March, 1996 Manju alias Uma died. Thereafter, the case was converted under Section 304-B IPC and after completion of investigation challan was presented in the Court and on commitment, the accused was charged in the manner noticed above.

3. In support of their case, prosecution examined 9 witnesses. Usha (PW-6), mother of the deceased and Sapattar Singh (PW-8), father of the deceased are the material witnesses.

4. On appreciation of evidence and hearing the parties learned Sessions Judge, Karnal, observed as follows:

"20. From the totality of the discussion noticed herein above it would appear that the accused had been responsible for the murder of his wife and also of causing torture and harassment to her. However, since he has been charged only under Section 498-A and 304-B Indian Penal Code, I would hold him guilty for the said offence and convict him there under which are lesser offences than Section 302 Indian Penal Code. I call upon the accused to address argument and to show the extenuating circumstances and to address arguments on the quantum of sentence."

5. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the medical evidence is contrary to the prosecution story and does not support the case of the prosecution. In this regard it was contended that if kerosene oil was poured on the deceased from behind then the burns would have been on the back of the deceased. However, the medical report/postmortem report does not find any burn injuries on the back of the deceased. It was further contended that the Trial Court and the High Court failed to appreciate that the occurrence was an accident as injuries were on the face, chest, and legs of the deceased which show and prove that the kerosene oil fell on her after bursting of kerosene stove.

6. Learned counsel further submitted that so called dying declaration cannot be relied upon, as first part of it is contradictory to the second part.

7. In the present case, Usha Devi (PW-6), mother of the deceased and Subedar Sapattar Singh (PW-8), father of the deceased are the material witnesses.

8. Usha Devi (PW-6), in her deposition stated that Manju, her daughter was married to the accused Pradeep Kumar on 20th June, 1995. In the evening of 1st March, 1996 at about 7 p.m. Jal Singh came to her and told her that the health of Manju was not proper and that she was admitted in Medical College Hospital, Rohtak. She reached Medical College Hospital, Rohtak around 12/12.30 a.m. In the Hospital the accused Pradeep Kumar and Santosh met her and told that Manju had received burns from a stove. When she went to see her daughter, Manju told her that she had got up around 5.30 a.m. when the accused Pradeep Kumar doused her in kerosene and set her on fire. She then stayed with her daughter, who died on 12th March, 1996. She stated that she did not know whether her daughter ever made a statement to the Magistrate. She further stated that her daughter had told her that there used to be quarrel in the family as the accused used to demand for Rs.1 lakh for running a piggery farm.

8.1. In her examination-in-chief, Usha Devi (PW-6), mother of the deceased deposed that when she reached the Hospital to see her daughter, the accused and other persons were present there so her daughter could not disclose anything to her. The Police did not record her statement so long she was admitted in the Medical College Hospital, Rohtak. She further stated that on 24th March, 1996 she had stated before the Police that her daughter Manju had told her that she received burn injuries from stove. Earlier she had a statement before Police on 13th March, 1996 wherein she stated that she had faith in the statement of Manju made before the Magistrate. She denied the suggestion that she had deposed before the Police that her daughter told her that she received burn injuries on account of bursting of stove. However, when she was confronted with portion 'A' to 'A' in Ex.DA it was found to have been so recorded.

9. Subedar Sapattar Singh (PW-8), stated that on 3rd March, 1996, he received a telephonic call from his wife from Rohtak that his daughter had been burnt and that he should come immediately. After obtaining leave from his Company Commander, he came to Rohtak by the evening of 4th March, 1996. He talked to his daughter (deceased). She told him that she had already made a statement to the Magistrate which should be accepted by them. When he talked to his daughter in the absence of others she told him that she and her husband wanted to open a piggery farm, and that Santosh Devi came to their house and told Pardeep Kumar-accused to obtain a sum of rupees one lakh from his father-in-law i.e. himself and that he should not apply for a loan. Pardeep at the instance of Santosh pressurized his wife (deceased) and also abused her physically in order to coerce her to meet the demand. PW.8 further stated that on 20th January, 1996, he received a letter from his daughter stating that the accused wanted a colour television. In the month of January his daughter and Pradeep came to his house and his daughter told him that she needed her Matriculation Certificate as she had to apply for a loan for piggery farm. She told that mother of Pradeep did not provide food to her. On 12th, his daughter died and on 13th the dead body was taken to village Ardana because the people from Ardana were in large number and in Rohtak he himself and his wife were only present.

9.1. During the cross-examination, Sapattar Singh (PW-8), stated that on 4th March, 1996 his daughter did not tell anything beyond the fact that she had already made a statement before the Magistrate which should be accepted by them. He remained with his daughter from 4th March, 1996 till her death. During this period no police officer met him. Police came to the Medical College Hospital on 13th March, 1996 and he made a statement before the Police.

10. Shri A.K. Bimal, CJM, Rohtak in his deposition stated that on 2nd March, 1996, ASI, Jai Prakash moved an application Ex.PA to him to record the statement of Manju wife of Pradeep Kumar, who was admitted in the Medical College Hospital, Rohtak. He proceeded to the Hospital and reached there at about 2 p.m. He obtained the opinion of the Doctor regarding the fitness of the patient. The Doctor gave his opinion Ex.PA/1 that the patient was fit to make a statement. Thereupon, he recorded the statement of Manju alias Uma Devi - EX.PB. It was read out to her and she gave thumb mark on it in token of its correctness. The Doctor attending upon the patient gave his endorsement Ex.PB/1 that the patient remained fit to make statement throughout the period of making the statement. After recording the statement he allowed a copy of it to be taken by the Police and made his endorsement Ex.PB/2 in this connection. The patient was identified by the Doctor attended upon the patient. The patient had made two statements at the same time. Both these statements were made by her in sequence and were recorded at the same time one after the other.

10.1. In his cross-examination, CJM stated that after recording of the first part of the statement when he asked the patient to put her thumb impression the patient told him that she wanted to make a truthful statement provided he did not say to anybody else. He asked the patient to put her signatures. But she was not in a position to put her signatures, therefore, her thumb impressions were taken.

11. Ex.PA is the dying declaration which reads as follows:

"Copy of writing in as under:

Q. Are you married?

Ans. I am married and having pregnancy of 7 month. After getting myself examined in ultra-sound, I have come to know that the foetus has been smashed.

Q. How many years of your marriage have passed?

Ans. My marriage was performed on 20.6.95.

Q. How you caught fire?

Ans. Yesterday at 5.30/6.00 a.m. I started preparing tea outside the varandah. My husband was sleeping in the last room. When the pump of stove was pressed to air and match stock was lit on, the stove at once got burst and the terrycot suit worn by me caught fire and when I raised alarm

RO& AC Sd/- C.J.M.

2.3.1996

Again said my statement be recorded again, because this statement was tutored to me by my husband. Now I want to make the statement again. You may not show the statement to anybody.

Q. What happened with you?

Ans. A dispute was going on with my husband for the last 10/15 days and he used to beat me and used to remain at the house and was doing nothing. One day my husband tried to hang me to death and demanded Rs.One Lakh from my parents otherwise he would hang me to death. He first tried to burn me in the night and when in the morning at 5.30 a.m. I went to bathroom he sprinkled the oil on the clothes from my back side and lit on the match stick and rushed towards inside. I raised noise upon which other persons saved me. Thereafter, my husband came there. He torn my clothes at the spot. I have been brought to Rohtak because I had been told that I shall narrate all this to the police. My mother-in-law prepares the meals herself. She prepares meals for my sister-in-law but she does not provide meals to me.

Q. Why did you make wrong statement earlier?

Ans. I was made to understand to make such statement.

Q. Are you literate?

Ans. Yes. I am matriculate.

RO & AC.

R.T.I. of Manju

Certified that patient remained fit throughout her statement.

Sd/-A.K. Vimal,
S.J.M. Rohtak,
2.3.96 at 2.30 P.M."

11.1. On going through the dying declaration, we find that the second part of dying declaration inspires confidence so as to consider it to be a dying declaration of the deceased. The first part of the dying declaration is tutored by the accused-husband as apparent from the said part of the dying declaration.

12. Dr. S.S. Dahiya (PW-7) conducted postmortem examination on the dead body of Manju wife of 
Pradeep Kumar. He stated that there was superficial to deep burns all over the body except face scalp, both legs and feet and a part of left upper arm. Pockets of pus were preset at some places. Liver spleen kidneys and both lungs were congested. In his opinion the cause of death in this case was burns which were ante-mortem in ordinary cause of events. Probable time that elapsed between injury and death was within few hours to few days and between death and postmortem was about 24 hours.

12.1. In his cross-examination, Dr. S.S.Dahiya (PW-7) stated that since the body of the deceased had been burnt it was unlikely that marks of the other injuries could be seen. If the deceased was sitting in front of the stove and the stove got burst she could have received injuries on her face and scalp which were not there in this case. He agreed with the suggestion that if kerosene was poured from behind the deceased and she was put on fire there would be injuries on the back side of the deceased. It is possible that the deceased could receive burn injuries if on account of pinning of the stove the oil and the flame left from the stove but in that case also the face and scalp should have been burnt which was not there in this case.

13. On going through the dying declaration, we have held that the second part of dying declaration inspires confidence so as to consider it to be a dying declaration of the deceased. The first part of dying declaration is tutored by the accused-husband as apparent from the said part of the dying declaration.


14. Usha Devi (PW-6), mother of the deceased-Manju stated that Manju had told her that there was a quarrel in the family because the accused had been making a demand of Rs. One lakh for running a piggery farm. Manju had also sent a letter to her father making a demand of Rs.5,000/-. Letter is Ex.PJ.


15. Sapattar Singh (PW-8), father of the deceased has also deposed with regard to the demand of the appellant. Although, appellant donated blood to save the life of his wife but it was of no use as it was too late. The deceased in the dying declaration stated that her husband had stated that he would hang her to death if his demand for Rs.1 lakh is not met by her parents and on 1st March, 1996, her husband tried to hang her. The appellant had initially tried to set her on fire during the night and when in the morning at 5.30 a.m. she went to bathroom he sprinkled the oil on the clothes from her back side and set her on fire. She categorically stated that earlier part of the statement was made at the instigation of her husband. The deceased had no reason to falsely implicate her husband particularly when she had suffered from burn injury.

16. From the aforesaid, evidence of Sapattar Singh (PW-8) and dying declaration, we find that there was a demand of dowry and harassment soon before the death.

17. For the purpose of Section 304-B IPC, a presumption can be raised only on the proof of the following essentials:

"(a) Death of a woman took place within seven years of her marriage.

(b) Such death took place not under normal circumstances.

(c) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(d) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry and

(e) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death.

18. The expression "soon before her death" used in the substantive Section 304-B IPC and 113-B of the Evidence Act was considered by this Court in Hira Lal & Others v. State (Govt. of NCT), Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 195 : 2003 (8) SCC 80], which reads as follows:

"8. Section 304-B IPC which deals with dowry death, reads as follows:

"304-B. Dowry death.- (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called 'dowry death', and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-section, 'dowry' shall have the same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

The provision has application when death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relatives of her husband for, or in connection with any demand for dowry. In order to attract application of Section 304-B IPC, the essential ingredients are as follows:

(i) The death of a woman should be caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under a normal circumstance.

(ii) Such a death should have occurred within seven years of her marriage.

(iii) She must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband.

(iv) Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with demand of dowry.

(v) Such cruelty or harassment is shown to have been meted out to the woman soon before her death.

Section 113-B of the Evidence Act is also relevant for the case at hand. Both Section 304-B IPC and Section 113-B of the Evidence Act were inserted as noted earlier by Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act 43 of 1986 with a view to combat the increasing menace of dowry deaths. Section 113-B reads as follows:

"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.-When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, 'dowry death' shall have the same meaning as in Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

The necessity for insertion of the two provisions has been amply analysed by the Law Commission of India in its 21st Report dated 10-8-1988 on "Dowry Deaths and Law Reform". Keeping in view the impediment in the pre-existing law in securing evidence to prove dowry-related deaths, the legislature thought it wise to insert a provision relating to presumption of dowry death on proof of certain essentials. It is in this background that presumptive Section 113-B in the Evidence Act has been inserted. As per the definition of "dowry death" in Section 304-B IPC and the wording in the presumptive Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, one of the essential ingredients, amongst others, in both the provisions is that the woman concerned must have been "soon before her death" subjected to cruelty or harassment "for or in connection with the demand of dowry". Presumption under Section 113-B is a presumption of law. On proof of the essentials mentioned therein, it becomes obligatory on the court to raise a presumption that the accused caused the dowry death. The presumption shall be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(1) The question before the court must be whether the accused has committed the dowry death of the woman. (This means that the presumption can be raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence under Section 304-B IPC.)

(2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for or in connection with any demand for dowry.

(4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death."

19. In the present case, it is not in dispute that marriage took place on 20th June, 1995. Manju, wife of the accused Pradeep Kumar got burnt on 1st March, 1996 and died on 12th March, 1996 within nine months of her marriage. Death of Manju was caused by burns i.e. otherwise than under normal circumstances. It has already been seen that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty and harassment in connection with demand of dowry. All the five ingredients were proved by the prosecution. Under Section 113-B of the Evidence Act when a question arises whether a person committed dowry death and it is proved that the death of woman took place within seven years of marriage; such death took place not under normal circumstances and soon before the death deceased was subjected to cruelty or harassment by such person for or in connection with any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death. The prosecution having successfully proved the dowry death, the Trial Court and the High Court correctly held the accused Pradeep Kumar guilty of the offence under Section 304B.

20. Section 498-A IPC reads as follows:

"498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.- Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation.-For the purpose of this section, "cruelty" means-

(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or

(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand."

21. In the present case, on the basis of the evidence of Subedar Sapattar Singh (PW-8) and dying declaration, it can be clearly concluded that the Trial Court and the High Court rightly held that the accused Pradeep Kumar had subjected Manju to harassment as defined under Clause (b) of explanation to Section 498-A.

22. In view of the aforesaid observation and finding, we find no ground to interfere with impugned judgment. In absence of any merit, the appeal is dismissed. Bail bond stands cancelled. Appellant is directed to be taken into custody forthwith to serve the remainder period of sentence.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Evidence Act, 1872
Section 113B - Penal Code, 1860, Sections 304B and 498A - Presumption under Section 113B, when can be invoked. Held, to invoke the presumption prosecution has to prove that deceased lady was subjected to cruelty or harassment for or in connection with dowry demand by accused soon before her death. This means that prosecution has to substantiate the ingredients of offences under Sections 498A and 302 IPC. Failure to prove this beyond reasonable doubt, cannot be condoned. Shindo Alias Sawinder Kaur [JT 2011 (6) SC 364], Rajeev Kumar [JT 2013 (14) SC 357], K. Prema S. Rao [JT 2002 (8) SC 502], referred. (Para 35)
HELD
Proof of cruelty or harassment by the husband or her relative or the person charged is thus the sine qua non to inspirit the statutory presumption, to draw the person charged within the coils thereof. If the prosecution fails to demonstrate by cogent coherent and persuasive evidence to prove such fact, the person accused of either of the above referred offences cannot be held guilty by taking refuge only of the presumption to cover up the shortfall in proof. (Para 33)

Penal Code, 1860
Sections 304B, 498A - Evidence Act, Section 113B - Dowry death within 7 years of marriage - Deceased found hanging in matrimonial home - Alleged demand for motorcycle, did not surface at the time of finalisation of marriage - This fact conceded by PW5, mother of deceased - Allegedly demand made after marriage and persisted for two years - No complaint made to police - Complaint of harassment founded on confidential communications to parents only and not supported by any other quarter - On the other hand, evidence of defence witnesses found to be consistent - Appellants No.1 was living separately from in-laws - As per DW 3, sister in-law of deceased, deceased abandoned the matrimonial home for her affair with son of a sarpanch - According to DW4, who had given his daughter in marriage to same family, he never encountered any demand for dowry. Held, prosecution has failed to prove the charges. Factum of unnatural death in matrimonial home within seven years of marriage is ipso facto not sufficient to convict accused under Sections 304B and 498A IPC. Further it was not established if death was suicidal or homicidal. Cause of external injuries was not proved. Hence benefit of doubt goes to accused. Trial court's order of acquittal, restored.
HELD
Tested on the judicially adumbrated parameters as above, we are of the unhesitant opinion that the prosecution has failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt, cruelty or harassment to the deceased for or in connection with any demand for dowry as contemplated in either of the two provisions of the Code under which the accused persons had been charged. Noticeably, the alleged demand centers around a motorcycle, which as the evidence of the prosecution witnesses would evince, admittedly did not surface at the time of finalization of the marriage. PW-5, the mother of the deceased has even conceded that there was no dowry demand at that stage. According to her, when the husband (who is dead) had insisted for a motorcycle thereafter he was assured that he would be provided with the same, finances permitting. Noticeably again, the demand, as sought to be projected by the prosecution, if accepted to be true had lingered for almost two years. Yet admittedly, no complaint was made thereof to anyone, far less the police. Apart from the general allegations in the same tone ingeminated with parrot like similarity by the prosecution witnesses, the allegation of cruelty and harassment to the deceased is founded on the confidential communications by her to her parents in particular and is not supported by any other quarter. (Para 36)

To the contrary, the evidence of the defence witnesses is consistent to the effect that no demand as imputed had ever been made as the family of the husband was adequately well-off and further the appellant No.1 Baijnath had been living separately from before the marriage. According to them there was no occasion for any quarrel/confrontation or unpleasantness in the family qua this issue. Significant is also the testimony of DW-3, the sister-in-law of the deceased who indicated abandonment of the matrimonial home by her with the son of Thoran Singh, the Sarpanch of the village for which she understandably had incurred the displeasure of the in-laws. DW-4, the father of DW-3 who had given his daughter in marriage in the same family had deposed that he did not ever encounter any demand for dowry. The testimony of the prosecution witnesses PW-3 and PW-7 fully consolidate the defence version. (Para 37)

A cumulative consideration of the overall evidence on the facet of dowry, leaves us unconvinced about the truthfulness of the charge qua the accused persons. The prosecution in our estimate, has failed to prove this indispensable component of the two offences beyond reasonable doubt. The factum of unnatural death in the matrimonial home and that too within seven years of marriage therefore is thus ipso facto not sufficient to bring home the charge under Sections 304B and 498A of the Code against them. (Para 38)

The predicament of the prosecution is compounded further by the by its failure to prove, the precise cause of the death of the deceased. It is not clear as to whether the death has been suicidal or homicidal. It is also not proved beyond doubt, the origin and cause of the external injuries. Though the obscurity of the causative factors is due to the putrefaction of the body, the benefit of the deficiency in proof, logically would be available to the persons charged. (Para 39)

Penal Code, 1860
Sections 304B, 498A - Provisions and their ingredients, stated. (Paras 27, 28)

Evidence Act
Section 113B - Statutory Presumption as to dowry death, stated. (Para 31)

CASES REFERRED
1.Rajeev Kumar v. State of Haryana [JT 2013 (14) SC 357] (Para 35)

2.Shindo Alias Sawinder Kaur and another v. State of Punjab [JT 2011 (6) SC 364] (Para 35)

3.K. Prema S. Rao v. Yadla Srinivasa Rao [JT 2002 (8) SC 502] (Para 35)

AMITAVA ROY, J.

1. The appellants, the in-laws of the deceased Saroj Bai, being aggrieved by the conversion of their acquittal into conviction by the High Court under Sections 498A and 304B of the Indian Penal Code (for short hereinafter referred to as the "Code") seek defeasance of this verdict in the present appeal.

2. Heard Mr. Siddhartha Dave, learned counsel for the appellants and Mr. Naveen Sharma, learned counsel for the respondent.

3. The genesis of the prosecution case lies in the information lodged by appellant Baijnath, the elder brother of the appellant No.2, Shivraj, the father-in-law of the deceased. The information disclosed that on 09.06.1996 at about 8 p.m. the family had dinner together and after watching television, retired to the respective rooms for the night. The deceased was married to Rakesh, son of appellant No.2. According to the informant, in the next morning she was found dead, hanging from the fan by a ligature.

4. On this information Merg No.20/1996 was registered with the Chanderi Police Station and on the completion of the investigation charge-sheet was laid against the appellants together with Rakesh, husband of the deceased and Prem Bai, wife of the appellant No.1 under Sections 302, 304B, 498A, 201 read with Section 34 of the Code. According to the prosecution, the investigation revealed that the husband of the deceased along with the appellants had been demanding dowry and in pursuit thereof had subjected the deceased to harassment and torture in the proximate past of the incident.

5. At the trial, the learned Additional Sessions Judge concerned framed charges against the accused persons under Sections 304B and 498A of the Code, which were denied by the accused persons. Subsequent thereto Rakesh committed suicide on 09.06.1998 by consuming poison and therefore he was deleted from the array of the persons indicted.

6. The prosecution at the trial examined 12 witnesses including the Investigating Officer and the 
Doctor who had performed the postmortem examination. The defence, after the recording of the statements of the appellants under Section 313 Cr.P.C., examined 4 witnesses.

7. The Trial Court on an exhaustive assessment of the evidence adduced, acquitted the accused persons of the charges against which the respondent/State preferred appeal before the High Court. The impugned decision has been rendered thereby upturning the acquittal.

8. The learned Trial Court while recording the admitted fact of marriage between the deceased and 
Rakesh and also that the incident had occurred in the matrimonial home of the wife within 7 years of the alliance, dismissed the evidence with regard to demand of motorcycle in dowry and the imputation of torture, cruelty and harassment as projected by the prosecution and thus exonerated the accused persons of the charges levelled holding that in the attendant materials on record, the statutory presumption as envisaged in Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1892 (hereinafter referred to as the "Act, 1892") was not available for invocation.

9. The High Court however being of the opinion that the deceased had died an unnatural death in suspicious circumstances in her matrimonial home within 7 years of marriage and that the same was preceded by persistent demands for a motorcycle as dowry in marriage accompanied by cruelty, returned the finding of guilt against the appellants but exonerated Prem Bai, the wife of appellant No.1 i.e. Baijnath. It accepted the evidence adduced by the prosecution qua the charge of dowry demand, harassment and cruelty in connection therewith and applied the deeming prescription/statutory presumption contained in Section 304B of the Code and Section 113B of Act, 1892.

10. The learned counsel for the appellants has in this backdrop insistently urged that the evidence in support of the charge of demand for a motorcycle as dowry in marriage by the husband and his family members being patently inadequate and unconvincing to furnish the ingredient relating thereto qua the charges levelled against the appellants, their conviction is utterly unsustainable and if allowed to stand would amount to travesty of justice. According to Mr. Dave, the imperative essentials of Sections 498A and 304B of the Code not having been proved, the High Court had fallen in error in applying the deeming edict/statutory presumption mandated by Section 304B of the Code and Section 113B of Act, 1892 in converting their acquittal to conviction. The learned counsel contended that as the medical evidence as well did not disclose with certainty the cause of death-homicidal or suicidal, there was as such no incriminating evidence on record to prove the culpability of the appellants. As not only the testimony of the prosecution witnesses with regard to demand for a motorcycle as dowry in marriage is visibly inconsistent, mutilating each other, the defence evidence to the contrary formidably establish the falsity of this charge, he urged. According to Mr. Dave the analysis of the evidence on record by the High Court has been erroneous leading to findings not borne out by the materials on record and thus are indefensible in any view of the matter warranting the acquittal of the appellants.

11. In emphatic refutation, the learned counsel for the respondent has argued that as admittedly the unfortunate incident had occurred within seven years of marriage in the matrimonial home and that too in suspicious circumstances, all the prerequisites of the offences under Sections 498A and 304B were proved beyond reasonable doubt and thus the impugned decision does not merit interference. The learned Trial Court did err in evaluating the evidence in the correct perspectives and the High Court having undertaken a painstaking review thereof, the findings arrived at by it, following a proper appreciation of the materials on record are not only valid in law but also in the exigent espousal of the cause of justice.

12. After outlining the rival submissions as above, it is considered expedient next to take a synopsised stock of the evidence adduced by the parties, so as to facilitate a better comprehension of the facets of the lis and the desired adjudication.

13. PW-1 Kundan Singh, the uncle of the deceased, deposed that the families of the accused persons were joint and that at the marriage, cash and other valuables were gifted to the in-laws of the deceased and that the ceremony was solemnized without any hassle. The witness however referred to a grievance being expressed later on by the deceased alleging that she was being harassed by her husband Rakesh and the appellants as well as Prem Bai, the wife of appellant No.1 relating to the demand of motorcycle in dowry. The witness also referred to another occasion where a similar complaint had been made by the deceased to him. He claimed to have seen the dead body of the deceased hanging from the fan.

14. In cross-examination, this witness deposed about a demand for motorcycle at the time of marriage but however conceded that no complaint was made to the police for such demand at any point of time. He denied the suggestion that the deceased had committed suicide as because her fidelity to her husband was being questioned in the face of her love affairs with the son of one Thoran Singh, the Sarpanch of the village.

15. PW-2 Jahar Singh, the father of the deceased mentioned about the demand for a motorcycle by the husband and the in-laws of the deceased at the time of the marriage and also the harassment in connection therewith suffered by the deceased as reported by her to him. The witness also referred to the same demand by the husband in the year 1996 on the occasion of Chowk Vidai, a ritual, whereupon he was assured that as and when it would be financially feasible, the same would be arranged. This witness as well stated that though the demand for the motorcycle was being made since the time of marriage in the year 1994, no complaint was made by him with regard thereto to anybody. When confronted with his statement in course of the investigation, he admitted of the omission in the disclosure that the deceased had confided in him about such demand during her limited stay at the matrimonial home and the harassment and mal-treatment in connection therewith. He denied the suggestion that the deceased had eloped with the son of Thoran Singh and that as a result there was a confrontation between him with the family of Thoran Singh. He also denied the suggestion that in view of this episode there was unpleasantness in the family of the in-laws of the deceased for which they had some reservation in accommodating her in the nuptial house.

16. PW-3 Jhulla, who at the relevant time was the Sarpanch of the village deposed that the deceased had committed suicide and that when he visited the spot, he did not see any injury on her body.

17. In cross-examination, he clarified that the appellant No.1 was living separately from the in-laws of the deceased from before the marriage. He also mentioned that the accused persons were held in high esteem in the village and used to behave decently with their daughter-in-law. He also stated that he had not heard about any demand of dowry made by the accused persons.

18. PW-4 Narayan Singh, a neighbour did mention about the demand of a motorcycle in dowry at the time of marriage and that the deceased had disclosed to her father about harassment meted out to her by the appellants and Prem Bai in connection therewith. In cross-examination the witness testified that there was no demand for dowry before the marriage and that there was no report with regard thereto to the police.

19. PW-5 Prembai, the mother of the deceased testified that no dowry was fixed before the marriage and no demand was made by the accused persons but they still offered Rs.1 lac to them. She stated that her son-in-law while dining made a demand for motorcycle which according to the witness was assured as and when the finances would be available. This witness deposed that even after two years of marriage, the appellants repeated the said demand to which a similar assurance was again given.

20. In cross-examination, this witness admitted that before the marriage no demand for motorcycle 
had been made as dowry, though she mentioned about the complaints made by the deceased to her about harassment by the accused persons for not providing the bike. She admitted that no complaint in this regard was ever made and the relations as well were not informed about the treatment suffered by the deceased.

21. PW-7 Jahar Singh did state about a demand of motorcycle made by Rakesh, the husband of the deceased.

22. PW-8 Gyasibai, a neighbour deposed that the deceased had committed suicide and that when she visited the place of occurrence, she did not notice any injury mark on her body. In cross-examination the witness stated that the deceased did never speak to her about the demand and testified that the in-laws did treat her properly and that there was no confrontation at any point of time.

23. PW-11 Manish Kapuria, the Investigating Officer narrated the steps taken by him in course of the inquisition and mentioned amongst others about the preparation of the panchnama of the dead body. Though this witness stated that the whole exercise was videographed, he admitted that the same had not been produced as evidence. He claimed to have seen two ligature marks on the neck of the deceased.

24. PW-12 Dr. R.P. Sharma, who had performed the postmortem examination, stated to have identified contusion on the right cheek, middle of left side of neck and middle of left parietal region in the dead body. According to him, the ligature mark was found to be ante-mortem in nature. He also mentioned that the 3 contusions were ante-mortem but opined that the ligature mark was postmortem in occurrence. On an overall assessment however, the witness stated that as at the time of autopsy the body had started putrefying, no opinion as to the cause of death could be given. In cross-examination the witness admitted that the dead body did not wear any other injury other than those mentioned.

25. The witnesses of the defence, namely, DW-1 Gaya Prasad, DW-2 Munna, DW-3 Har Kunwar Bai and DW-4 Sirnam Singh in unison testified that there was no demand for dowry or motorcycle ever made by the husband of the deceased or her in-laws. They further stated that the appellant No.1 Baijnath had been residing separately from the in-laws of the deceased from before the marriage. According to them, the family of the in-laws of the deceased was sufficiently well-off and did enjoy appreciable reputation in the society. These witnesses were all neighbours of the appellants.

26. DW-3 Har Kunwar Bai, in addition stated that the deceased had during her marriage eloped with the son of Pradhan of the Village Chitara and that in the night of the incident she was with her, watching television before they parted for their respective rooms to sleep. This witness is the daughter-in-law of appellant No.2 and asserted that neither she nor the deceased had ever been harassed in the family.

27. The evidence on record and the competing arguments have received our required attention. As the prosecution is on the charge of the offences envisaged in Sections 304B and 498A of the Code, the provisions for reference are extracted hereunder:

"304B. Dowry death.-(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation. - For the purpose of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life.

498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.-Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation.-For the purpose of this section, "cruelty" means-

(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or

(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand.

28. Whereas in the offence of dowry death defined by Section 304B of the Code, the ingredients thereof are:

(i) death of the woman concerned is by any burns or bodily injury or by any cause other than in normal circumstances and

(ii) is within seven years of her marriage and

(iii) that soon before her death, she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of the husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry.

the offence under Section 498A of the Code is attracted qua the husband or his relative if she is subjected to cruelty. The explanation to this Section exposits "cruelty" as:

(i) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) or

(ii) harassment of the woman, where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand.

29. Patently thus, cruelty or harassment of the lady by her husband or his relative for or in connection with any demand for any property or valuable security as a demand for dowry or in connection therewith is the common constituent of both the offences.

30. The expression "dowry" is ordained to have the same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. The expression "cruelty", as explained, contains in its expanse, apart from the conduct of the tormentor, the consequences precipitated thereby qua the lady subjected thereto. Be that as it may, cruelty or harassment by the husband or any relative of his for or in connection with any demand of dowry to reiterate is the gravamen of the two offences.

31. Section 113B of the Act enjoins a statutory presumption as to dowry death in the following terms:

"113B. Presumption as to dowry death. - When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman has been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation. - For the purpose of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same meaning as in section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)"

32. Noticeably this presumption as well is founded on the proof of cruelty or harassment of the woman dead for or in connection with any demand for dowry by the person charged with the offence. The presumption as to dowry death thus would get activated only upon the proof of the fact that the deceased lady had been subjected to cruelty or harassment for or in connection with any demand for dowry by the accused and that too in the reasonable contiguity of death.

32.1. Such a proof is thus the legislatively mandated prerequisite to invoke the otherwise statutorily ordained presumption of commission of the offence of dowry death by the person charged therewith.

33. A conjoint reading of these three provisions, thus predicate the burden of the prosecution to unassailably substantiate the ingredients of the two offences by direct and convincing evidence so as to avail the presumption engrafted in Section 113B of the Act against the accused. Proof of cruelty or harassment by the husband or her relative or the person charged is thus the sine qua non to inspirit the statutory presumption, to draw the person charged within the coils thereof. If the prosecution fails to demonstrate by cogent coherent and persuasive evidence to prove such fact, the person accused of either of the above referred offences cannot be held guilty by taking refuge only of the presumption to cover up the shortfall in proof.

34. The legislative imprimatur of relieving the prosecution of the rigour of the proof of the often practically inaccessible recesses of life within the guarded confines of a matrimonial home and of replenishing the consequential void, by according a presumption against the person charged, cannot be over-eased to gloss-over and condone its failure to prove credibly, the basic facts enumerated in the Sections involved, lest justice is the casualty.

35. This Court while often dwelling on the scope and purport of Section 304B of the Code and Section 113B of the Act have propounded that the presumption is contingent on the fact that the prosecution first spell out the ingredients of the offence of Section 304B as in Shindo Alias Sawinder Kaur and another v. State of Punjab [JT 2011 (6) SC 364] and echoed in Rajeev Kumar v. State of Haryana [JT 2013 (14) SC 357]. In the latter pronouncement, this Court propounded that one of the essential ingredients of dowry death under Section 304B of the Code is that the accused must have subjected the woman to cruelty in connection with demand for dowry soon before her death and that this ingredient has to be proved by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt and only then the Court will presume that the accused has committed the offence of dowry death under Section 113B of the Act. It referred to with approval, the earlier decision of this Court in K. Prema S. Rao v. Yadla Srinivasa Rao [JT 2002 (8) SC 502] to the effect that to attract the provision of Section 304B of the Code, one of the main ingredients of the offence which is required to be established is that "soon before her death" she was subjected to cruelty and harassment "in connection with the demand for dowry".

36. Tested on the judicially adumbrated parameters as above, we are of the unhesitant opinion that the prosecution has failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt, cruelty or harassment to the deceased for or in connection with any demand for dowry as contemplated in either of the two provisions of the Code under which the accused persons had been charged. Noticeably, the alleged demand centers around a motorcycle, which as the evidence of the prosecution witnesses would evince, admittedly did not surface at the time of finalization of the marriage. PW-5, the mother of the deceased has even conceded that there was no dowry demand at that stage. According to her, when the husband (who is dead) had insisted for a motorcycle thereafter he was assured that he would be provided with the same, finances permitting. Noticeably again, the demand, as sought to be projected by the prosecution, if accepted to be true had lingered for almost two years. Yet admittedly, no complaint was made thereof to anyone, far less the police. Apart from the general allegations in the same tone ingeminated with parrot like similarity by the prosecution witnesses, the allegation of cruelty and harassment to the deceased is founded on the confidential communications by her to her parents in particular and is not supported by any other quarter.

37. To the contrary, the evidence of the defence witnesses is consistent to the effect that no demand as imputed had ever been made as the family of the husband was adequately well-off and further the appellant No.1 Baijnath had been living separately from before the marriage. According to them there was no occasion for any quarrel/confrontation or unpleasantness in the family qua this issue. Significant is also the testimony of DW-3, the sister-in-law of the deceased who indicated abandonment of the matrimonial home by her with the son of Thoran Singh, the Sarpanch of the village for which she understandably had incurred the displeasure of the in-laws. DW-4, the father of DW-3 who had given his daughter in marriage in the same family had deposed that he did not ever encounter any demand for dowry. The testimony of the prosecution witnesses PW-3 and PW-7 fully consolidate the defence version.

38. A cumulative consideration of the overall evidence on the facet of dowry, leaves us unconvinced about the truthfulness of the charge qua the accused persons. The prosecution in our estimate, has failed to prove this indispensable component of the two offences beyond reasonable doubt. The factum of unnatural death in the matrimonial home and that too within seven years of marriage therefore is thus ipso facto not sufficient to bring home the charge under Sections 304B and 498A of the Code against them.

39. The predicament of the prosecution is compounded further by the by its failure to prove, the precise cause of the death of the deceased. It is not clear as to whether the death has been suicidal or homicidal. It is also not proved beyond doubt, the origin and cause of the external injuries. Though the obscurity of the causative factors is due to the putrefaction of the body, the benefit of the deficiency in proof, logically would be available to the persons charged.

40. In all, tested on the overall scrutiny of the evidence as a whole, in our comprehension, the conviction of the accused persons including the appellants herein on the basis of the materials on record would not be out of risk. To reiterate, the prosecution has failed to prove the crucial ingredient of cruelty and harassment by direct and cogent evidence thereby disentitling itself to the benefit of the statutory presumption available under Section 113B of the Act.

41. Whereas the analysis of the evidence by the Trial Court, in our view, has been in the proper perspectives, factual and legal and thus the findings recorded by it are valid, the High Court based its determination substantially on presumptive inferences taking the aid of Section 113B of the Act, divorced from the attendant facts and the evidence with regard thereto. We are thus of the opinion, that the conclusions of the High Court do not constitute a plausible view on the materials on record and cannot be sustained.

42. The appellants thus in view of the evaluation made hereinabove are entitled to the benefit of doubt. The appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment and order is set-aside. The appellants are hereby ordered to be set at liberty forthwith if not wanted in connection with any other case. Let the records of the Trial Court be remitted immediately for the needful.

**********
CASES REFERRED
1.Ramesh Panjiyar v. State of Bihar [JT 2005 (2) SC 218] (Para 14)

2.Dhian Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab [JT 2004 (7) SC 212] (Para 17)

3.Kanas Raj v. State of Punjab & Ors. [JT 2000 (5) SC 223] (Para 16)

4.State of Punjab v. Iqbal Singh [AIR 1991 SC 1532] (Para 12)

M.Y. EQBAL, J.

1. This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 17th February, 2010 of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in Criminal Appeal No. 1006-SB of 1998 whereby learned Judge of the High Court dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellant challenging the judgment of conviction/sentence passed by the trial court.

2. The prosecution version in a nutshell is that marriage of Manju Bala was solemnized with Dinesh, appellant-accused about four years before her death. Dowry in accordance with their financial capacity was given by her parents at the time of marriage. However, appellant and his two brothers, namely Vinod Kumar and Rakesh, were not satisfied with the dowry and started harassing her for not bringing dowry to their satisfaction. Although, mediators also requested accused persons not to harass the deceased Manju Bala, their requests fell flat. It has also been alleged that the accused persons, appellant and his two brothers, did not permit the parents of Manju Bala to meet her for the past several months prior to the death.

3. Manju Bala was carrying a pregnancy of about eight months when accused Vinod went to the house of her parents on the fateful day i.e. on 7.6.1994 and informed them that Manju Bala was seriously ill. When Manju Bala's father Ram Naresh and brother Raman were going to the house of accused persons for seeing her, they noticed accused Dinesh and his mother carrying Manju Bala in a tractor to Civil Hospital Fatehabad. Driver of the tractor ignored their signal to stop tractor. On arriving at Civil Hospital, they learnt that Manju Bala had died before reaching the Hospital. Munni Bai - mother of the deceased suspected that her daughter was murdered by her husband Dinesh and his brothers, namely Vinod and Rakesh, for not satisfying their demand for dowry. On her statement, FIR No.441 dated 8.6.1994 under section 498-A and 304-B, Indian Penal Code (in short 'IPC') was registered in the Police Station, Fatehabad and all the three accused were arrested. On finding a prima facie case under aforesaid sections, the accused persons were charge sheeted.

4. In order to prove its case, the prosecution examined nine witnesses and closed the evidence. Factum of marriage between Manju Bala and Dinesh was admitted when the accused persons were examined under Section 313, Cr.P.C. However, it was denied that Manju Bala was ever harassed for bringing dowry. Accused controverted the allegations and claimed that they had good relations with Manju, who at the time of first delivery developed complication and child died. Thereafter, when she was about to deliver child, she again developed complication and resultantly she died. During trial, the accused examined three witnesses in their defence.

5. The Trial Court after concluding the trial found the charge under Sections 498-A and 304-B, IPC framed against accused Dinesh proved. The Trial Court opined that the prosecution failed to prove the charges under aforesaid sections against the other two accused Vinod and Rakesh and accordingly acquitted them of the charge. The Additional Sessions Judge convicted Dinesh and sentenced him to undergo RI for one year under Section 498-A and to pay a fine of Rs.500/-. In default of payment of fine, the accused-appellant was further directed to undergo RI for six months. He was further sentenced to undergo RI for ten years under Section 304-B, IPC. Both the sentences were ordered to run concurrently.

6. Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the Trial Court, appellant approached the High Court preferring Criminal Appeal No. 1006 of 1998. After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the essential ingredients of Section 304-B, IPC, learned Judge of the High Court dismissed the appeal observing that there is evidence with regard to the factum of persisting demand of dowry and on account of failure to meet the demand for dowry, Manju Bala was compelled to commit suicide within a period of four years of marriage, though the precise date of her marriage is not in evidence but both sides admitted that marriage was solemnized about four years prior to her death.

7. We have gone through the judgment passed by Trial Court and also by the Appellate Court. Both the Courts on appreciation of entire evidence came to the conclusion that the prosecution has proved the charges against the appellant. The High Court while affirming the judgment of the Trial Court has considered the provision of Section 304-B, I.P.C. and Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act. The High Court relied upon the evidences of PWs.1, 2 and 5 to come to the conclusion that there had been persistent demand for dowry and also the complainant was not allowed to meet the deceased and further the death was caused by the consumption of oreganophosphorus compound, which conclusively establishes the appellant guilty under Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code. The High Court further recorded the findings that the totality of evidence reveal persisting demand for dowry and on the failure of the complainant to meet the demand, the deceased was compelled to commit the suicide within the period of four years of marriage.

8. Assailing the impugned judgment of conviction, Mr. Rishi Malhotra, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, firstly contended that in absence of evidence that the deceased soon before her death was subjected to cruelty, the conviction of the appellant under Section 304-B, IPC cannot at all be sustained. Learned counsel also submits that Munni Bai, mother of the deceased, who was examined as PW-1 deposed that she was not aware about the reason of the death of the deceased. The witness was declared hostile by the prosecution and during her cross-examination she categorically admitted that the police did not record her statement according to her narration. Learned counsel has further drawn our attention to the evidence of these witnesses on cross examination where she was confronted with the fact of alleged demand for dowry where the witness admitted that she had not stated before the police that accused were demanding T.V. and a golden chain. Learned counsel contended that PW-2 Rakesh Kumar, who was one of the mediators in the said marriage, wrongly stated that the alleged demand for dowry by the accused persons were made approximately four years before the date of occurrence. On the basis of these evidence, learned counsel contended that the courts below without looking into the various material contradictions have passed the impugned order of conviction. Learned counsel submitted that the High Court completely overlooked the most essential ingredient i.e. soon before her death the deceased must have subjected to cruelty or harassment in connection with demand for dowry. Lastly, it was contended that even admitting the evidence on record the demand, if any, was made about four years before the death of the deceased even then by no stretch of imagination it can be held that soon before her death the deceased was subjected to cruelty or harassment in connection with the demand for dowry.

9. Per contra, Mr. Rakesh Kumar, learned counsel appearing for the prosecution, has supported the impugned judgment by drawing our attention to the material evidence brought on record by the prosecution.

10. Before we discuss the facts in evidence brought on record, we wish to discuss the relevant provisions which are involved in this case. As noticed, the appellant is convicted under Section 304-B of I.P.C. The said section reads as under:-

"304-B- Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called" dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub- section,"dowry" shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2)Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

11. Another relevant provision which needs to be discussed is Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The said provision is quoted hereinbelow:-

"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.- When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section," dowry death" shall have the same meaning as in section 304B of the Indian Penal Code."

12. These two provisions in Indian Penal Code and Indian Evidence Act have been inserted by the Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 1986 with a view to combating the increasing menace of dowry death. The legislative intent of enacting these provisions is to curb the menace of dowry death. This Court while considering the legislative intent in the case of State of Punjab v. Iqbal Singh [AIR 1991 SC 1532] observed as under:-

"8. The legislative intent is clear to curb the menace of dowry deaths, etc., with a firm hand. We must keep in mind this legislative intent. It must be remembered that since crimes are generally committed in the privacy of residential homes and in secrecy, independent and direct evidence is not easy to get. That is why the legislature has by introducing Sections 113-A and 113-B in the Evidence Act tried to strengthen the prosecution hands by permitting a presumption to be raised if certain foundational facts are established and the unfortunate event has taken place within seven years of marriage. This period of seven years is considered to be the turbulent one after which the legislature assumes that the couple would have settled down in life. If a married women is subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his family members Section 498-A, IPC would be attracted. If such cruelty or harassment was inflicted by the husband or his relative for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry immediately preceding death by burns and bodily injury or in abnormal circumstances within seven years of marriage, such husband or relative is deemed to have caused her death and is liable to be punished under Section 304-B, IPC. When the question at issue is whether a person is guilty of dowry death of a woman and the evidence discloses that immediately before her death she was subjected by such person to cruelty and/or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, Section 113-B, Evidence Act provides that the court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death. Of course if there is proof of the person having intentionally caused her death that would attract Section 302, IPC. Then we have a situation where the husband or his relative by his wilful conduct creates a situation which he knows will drive the woman to commit suicide and she actually does so, the case would squarely fall within the ambit of Section 306, IPC. In such a case the conduct of the person would tantamount to inciting or provoking or virtually pushing the woman into a desperate situation of no return which would compel her to put an end to her miseries by committing suicide."

13. If we read the aforementioned two provisions i.e. Section 304-B, IPC and Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, it is evident that the prosecution must have brought on record the materials to show that soon before her death the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment.

14. In the case of Ramesh Panjiyar v. State of Bihar [JT 2005 (2) SC 218 : 2005 (2) SCC 388], this Court held that the prosecution has to rule out the possibility of a natural or incidental death so as to bring it within the purview of "Death occurring otherwise than in the normal circumstances". The expression "soon before" is very relevant where Section 113-B of the Evidence Act and Section 304-B, IPC are pressed into service. Hence, the prosecution is obliged to show that soon before the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment only attracting the provision of Section 113-B.

15. The expression "soon before" is a relative term as held by this Court, which is required to be considered under the specific circumstances of each case and no straight jacket formula can be laid down by fixing any time of allotment. It can be said that the term "soon before" is synonyms with the term "immediately before". The determination of the period which can come within term "soon before" is left to be determined by courts depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case.

16. In the case of Kanas Raj v. State of Punjab & Ors. [JT 2000 (5) SC 223 : 2000 (5) SCC 207], it was held that in case of dowry death the circumstances showing the existence of cruelty or harassment to the deceased are not restricted to a particular instances but normally refer to a course of conduct. Such conduct may be spread over a period of time. If the cruelty or harassment or demand of dowry is shown to have persisted, it shall be deemed to be "soon before death".

17. Prima facie we are of the view that neither definite period has been indicted in the aforementioned section nor the expression "soon before" has been defined. In the case of Dhian Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab [JT 2004 (7) SC 212 : 2004 (7) SCC 759], this Court held that:-

"The contention of the appellant's counsel is that even if it is proved that there was cruelty on account of demand of dowry, such cruelty shall be soon before the death and there must be proximate connection between the alleged cruelty and the death of the deceased. It is true that the prosecution has to establish that there must be nexus between the cruelty and the suicide and the cruelty meted out must have induced the victim to commit suicide. The appellant has no case that there was any other reason for her to commit suicide. The evidence shows that the first appellant had demanded dowry and he had sent her away from his house and only after mediation she was taken back to the appellant's house and death happened within a period of two months thereafter. These facts clearly show that the suicide was the result of the harassment or cruelty meted out to the deceased. The presumption under Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act could be invoked against the appellant and the Sessions Court rightly found the appellant guilty of the offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC and Section 201 IPC."

18. Coming to the facts of the present case, it has been sufficiently proved that the death was caused due to consumption of oreganophosphorus compound which is a pesticide. Dr. S.P. Mimani and Dr. S.P. Dadich (PW-9) conducted postmortem examination on the dead body of the deceased. They collected viscera including parts of stomach, intestine, lung, kidney and blood. On examination of the viscera it was found containing oreganophosphorus compound which is a poisonous substance. In the opinion of Dr. S.P. Mimani (PW-9) the death was caused by the aforementioned compound. Admittedly, the marriage was solemnised before four years from the date of occurrence. The defence of the accused that the death was caused due to some complication developed at the advanced stage of pregnancy, is without any basis. The mother of the deceased, who was examined as PW-1, deposed that at the time of marriage dowry was paid as per their financial position. After the marriage the deceased Manju Bala visited her paternal home and informed her parents that her husband Dinesh and his brothers Vinod Kumar and Rakesh were ill-treating her for not bringing television and gold chain in dowry. This was brought to the notice of Suresh and Rakesh, who acted as mediators at the time of settlement of marriage proposal and requested the accused persons not to harass the deceased but they did not heed to it. PW-1 further deposed that the accused person did not allow them to meet their daughter. The evidence of PW- 1 was corroborated by Ram Naresh (PW-5), who also reiterated that the accused persons were demanding television and a gold chain and the deceased was subjected to cruelty for not bringing enough dowry. PW-5 further deposed that when he went to the house of accused persons at the time of marriage of his brother Vinod, he was again reminded that he should come to their house only after giving television and gold chain. From the evidence of other witnesses, it is sufficiently established that there had been persistent demand for dowry from the side of the accused persons and for non-fulfilment of their demand the deceased Manju Bala was being subjected to cruelty and harassment. Because of persistent demand for dowry and continuous torture, harassment and cruelty meted out on the deceased Manju Bala, she died by consuming pesticide.

19. Considering the evidence referred to hereinbefore and the conduct of the accused persons, there cannot be any difficulty in holding that the deceased died because of cruelty, harassment and demand for dowry. We are also of the considered opinion that there is a proximate connection between cruelty, harassment and death of the deceased as discussed above. There are sufficient materials showing that the accused persons started demanding television and gold chain etc. after the marriage and that their demand continued and the parents were not allowed to meet their daughter unless their demands were fulfilled.

20. In the facts and circumstances of the case, both the Sessions Court and the High Court have come to the correct finding that the accused is guilty of offence under Section 304-B of the IPC and that the presumption contained in Section 113-B of the Evidence Act is fully applicable to the facts of the case.

21. In our considered opinion, therefore, the judgment of conviction passed by the courts below needs no interference by this Court. Hence, there is no merit in this appeal and is accordingly dismissed. The appellant shall be taken into custody forthwith to serve the remaining sentence.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2014 AIR (SC) 2555
2014 (9) SCC 645
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Section 304B - Evidence Act, 1872, Sections 3, 113B - Conviction under - Evidence - Appreciation - Death of wife within 7 years of marriage - Presumption of dowry death - When can be raised. Principles stated. Kaliaperumal's case referred. Sunil Bajaj's case relied upon with Hira Lal's, Balwant Singh's cases.
HELD
A presumption "of dowry death and under Section 113B of Evidence Act" can be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(a) Death of the woman was caused by burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances.

(b) Such death took place within seven years of her marriage.

(c) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(d) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry and

(e) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death. (Para 17)

Sections 304B, 498A - Evidence Act, 1872, Sections 3, 113B - Conviction under - Evidence - Appreciation - Death by burning within 5 years of marriage - Statement of complainant/ mother of deceased, not specific but general in nature - No specific incident indicating cruelty by accused - Statement not reliable or trustworthy - Trial Court did not record conviction under 498A. Held that prosecution has failed to establish its case. Accused acquitted.
HELD
Raj Rani (PW.1), mother of the deceased- Darshana @Phullan stated that the accused married her daughter about five years back. The accused used to harass her daughter on account of inadequacy of dowry and used to make demands for cash. According to PW-1, the accused made a demand of Rs. 10,000/- which she could not meet. All the accused persons used to give beatings to Darshana @ Phullan and she was pressurized to bring more items of dowry while sufficient dowry was given to the accused at the time of marriage. Initially for about eight days, the accused kept her daughter nicely but thereafter she used to be harassed and beaten by the accused repeatedly. During the life time of father of the deceased, he used to meet the dowry demands of the appellant. The deceased used to complain that her husband was not allowing her to stay in the matrimonial home unless some payments were made and the complainant (PW.1) had been paying her money and used to sent her back to the matrimonial house by meeting the demands of the appellant. (Para 5)

During the cross-examination, she stated that she made the statement before the police that till the death of her husband, he was meeting the demands of the accused through her daughter and used to give money and other articles. During the cross-examination, she further stated that she was informed by Jindu, her father-in-law that the deceased was being beaten by her husband after consuming liquor and that she wanted the matter to be settled once for all. When confronted with the statement-EX.P.D. it was found that no such statement was given before the police. Her statement that her maternal uncle was also present, when confronted with Ex.P.D., it was not found recorded. Jindu, father-in-law of PW.1 also did not support the case of the prosecution. Therefore, he was declared hostile. (Para 8)

Admittedly, death of the deceased was due to burning i.e. not in normal circumstances. (Para 20)

The statement of the complainant PW.1 is general and not specific. No specific incidence has been indicated suggesting the cruelty or harassment made by the accused-Manohar Lal. Her statement is not reliable and not trustworthy. Though the allegation of demand of dowry was made none of the witnesses including PW.1 stated that the deceased was harassed "soon before her death" for or in connection with demand of dowry. The accused appellant was charge-sheeted under Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC but the Trial Court has not convicted the accused under Section 498-A. In this background, we are of the opinion that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove that the accused harassed the deceased soon before her death for or in connection with a demand of dowry. (Para 21)

CASES REFERRED
1.Balwant Singh and Another v. State of Punjab [2004 (7) SCC 724] (Para 19.1.)

2.Hira Lal & Others v. State (Govt. of NCT), Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 195] (Para 19)

3.Kaliaperumal v. State of Tamil Nadu [JT 2003 (7) SC 392] (Para 17.1.)

4.Sunil Bajaj v. State of M.P. [JT 2001 (8) SC 465] (Para 18)

SUDHANSU JYOTI MUKHOPADHAYA, J.

1. This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 26th March, 2007 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No.529-SB of 1994. By the impugned judgment the High Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the conviction and sentence of the appellant under Section 304B IPC for which he stands sentenced to undergo RI for seven years.

2. The case of the prosecution is that Phullan @ Darshana, (deceased) was married to the accused-Manohar Lal about 5 years prior to her death which took place on 27th August, 1991. She was subjected to harassment for dowry and finally she died on account of burn injuries. Raj Rani (PW-1), mother of the deceased on learning about the incident, went to Civil Hospital and found the victim dead. Thereafter she made statement (Exh.PD) before the Police at 12.05 P.M. on 28th August, 1991, on the basis of which FIR was registered. Apart from the appellant, his brothers Krishan Lal, Harbans Lal, his father Gopal Dass, mother Shanti and wife of the brother Smt. Champa were also made accused.

2.1. ASI Surat Kant (PW.9) investigated the case and recorded the D.D.R.-Ex. P.M. on the statement of Hans Raj (PW.8) and Sat Pal. He then alongwith the above-said persons went to the house where the death took place and prepared the inquest report -Ex.P.H./1. He took into possession one pipi-Ex. P.7, steel bowl -Ex. P-8, burnt match sticks Ex.P.9 to Ex.P.11 and half burnt piece of cloth alongwith some cash. .After sealing the same into separate parcels with the seal of SK, vide recovery memo Ex. P.N. attested by PWs site plan-Ex.P.O. was also prepared by him with correct marginal notes. Photographs of the dead body were also taken by Swaran Kumar (PW.7). The dead body was sent to the Civil Hospital, through constable Krishan Lal, for post-mortem examination. On the next day, Raj Rani (PW.1) made her statement -Ex.P.D. on which endorsement -Ex.PD/1 was made and on the basis of which formal FIR -Ex.P.D./2 was recorded by ASI- Ram Krishna. Krishan Lal, Constable produced before him one pair of ear rings of gold which were made into a parcel and sealed with the seal SK and taken into possession vide recovery memo Ex.P.P.. The accused were arrested on 30th August, 1991 and dowry articles were recovered and were taken into possession vide memo Ex.P.O. Complainant-Raj Rani (PW.1) also produced before him the list of Kanayadan Mark A. After completion of the investigation, all the accused were charge-sheeted for offence under Section 498-A /34 IPC and Section 304B/34 IPC, to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

3. The prosecution examined altogether nine witnesses and placed on record the documentary evidence. Defence also produced Ram Prakash as defence witness. The Trial Court after hearing the parties and on appreciation of evidence by the judgment dated 25th August, 1994 convicted the appellant for the offence punishable under Section 304B IPC and sentenced him to undergo RI for seven years. The rest of the accused i.e. his brothers Krishan Lal, Harbans Lal, his father Gopal Dass, mother Shanti and wife of the brother Smt. Champa were acquitted by the Trial Court on the ground that they were all residing separately at a far place from the place of occurrence where deceased was living with the appellant.

4. Learned counsel for the appellant made the following submissions:

(a) There was inordinate delay of twenty hours in lodging FIR.

(b) The prosecution failed to prove that accused harassed the deceased 'soon before the death' for or in connection with the demand of dowry.

(c) Satpal, son of Bodha Ram and Puran Chand in their statements under Section 174 Cr.P.C. did not say anything about cruelty on account of demand of dowry.

(d) The accused Manohar Lal married with Darshana @ Phoolan eight years prior to her death. Therefore, provisions of Section 304B IPC is not attracted in this case.

5. Raj Rani (PW.1), mother of the deceased- Darshana @Phullan stated that the accused married her daughter about five years back. The accused used to harass her daughter on account of inadequacy of dowry and used to make demands for cash. According to PW-1, the accused made a demand of Rs. 10,000/- which she could not meet. All the accused persons used to give beatings to Darshana @ Phullan and she was pressurized to bring more items of dowry while sufficient dowry was given to the accused at the time of marriage. Initially for about eight days, the accused kept her daughter nicely but thereafter she used to be harassed and beaten by the accused repeatedly. During the life time of father of the deceased, he used to meet the dowry demands of the appellant. The deceased used to complain that her husband was not allowing her to stay in the matrimonial home unless some payments were made and the complainant (PW.1) had been paying her money and used to sent her back to the matrimonial house by meeting the demands of the appellant.

6. One day prior to the last Rakhi festival, Jindu Ram-father-in-law of PW.1 went to the house of in-laws of Darshana@Phullan to meet her and on his return, Jindu Ram (father-in-law of PW.1) informed her that Darshana @ Phullan told that she was beaten by the accused after taking liquor and it was not possible for her to live in the matrimonial house. This information was given to PW.1 by her father-in-law in presence of her maternal uncle Devi Lal.

7. She further stated that about 8-9 months after the rakhi festival, her daughter-Darshana @ Phullan died. She had been killed by her-in-laws. She then came to Yamuna Nagar and saw the dead body of her daughter having external injuries on her dead person which appeared to have been caused on being strangulated. Policed recorded the statement of PW.1 and took thumb impression which was marked as Ext.PD. The above statement is not supported by any evidence and contradictory to post-mortem report, which shows that the death was due to shock resulting from burns.

8. During the cross-examination, she stated that she made the statement before the police that till the death of her husband, he was meeting the demands of the accused through her daughter and used to give money and other articles. During the cross-examination, she further stated that she was informed by Jindu, her father-in-law that the deceased was being beaten by her husband after consuming liquor and that she wanted the matter to be settled once for all. When confronted with the statement-EX.P.D. it was found that no such statement was given before the police. Her statement that her maternal uncle was also present, when confronted with Ex.P.D., it was not found recorded. Jindu, father-in-law of PW.1 also did not support the case of the prosecution. Therefore, he was declared hostile.

9. PW.5 -Smt. Usha Rani, neighbor of the deceased also did not support the story of the prosecution. 
Therefore, she was also declared hostile.

10. PW.3 -Dr.N.K.Garg had conducted post-mortem examination of deceased-Darshana @Phullan on 28th August, 1991 at 12.30 P.M. Dr. A.K. Gupta was also present with PW.3. Carbon copy of post-mortem report indicates that death was due to shock resulting from burns. PW.4 -Om Parkash, draftsman had prepared the site plan -Ex.P.J. of the place of occurrence.

11. PW.5-Usha Rani as stated above, informed that Manohar Lal was residing with his wife-Darshana @ Phullan and she did not know how deceased-Darshana @ Phullan was treated by her husband. In her cross-examination, she stated that when she asked, the deceased told her that husband had beaten her. But she did not state the specific date of the incident. PW.5 was also declared hostile.

12. PW.6-Ram Mehar Singh, Constable tendered his affidavit Ex.P.M. in evidence. PW.7-Sarwan Kumar- Photographer went to the house of accused-Manohar Lal and took three photographs- Ex.P.1 to Ex.P.3 and the positives are Ex.P.4 to Ex.P.6. PW.8-Hans Raj alongwith Sat Pal saw smoke coming out from the house of Manohar Lal. They went there and saw that one girl was lying burning. They went to police post and lodged report Ex.P.M. Then they came back with the police and were asked by the police to go to the village Antawa to inform the parents of the accused that their Bahu had died. Then they went there and informed accordingly.

13. PW.9-ASI Surat Kant, Investigating Officer supported the prosecution story and submitted the report of FSL as evidence Ex.P.R.

14. After closing of the prosecution evidence, the accused were examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C. on all the material particulars appearing against them. Accused-Manohar Lal admitted his marriage with the deceased. He denied the other allegations against him. He took specific plea that he had separated from his parents just after the marriage and was living at Yamuna Nagar. He pleaded innocence and stated that for the last 4 or 5 years, he was working with Prakash Transport as driver and was living happily with his wife. A daughter was also born out of their wedlock. He never made any demand of dowry and never maltreated the deceased- Darshana @ Phullan. He also stated that his wife-deceased Darshana @ Phullan got her cousin sister Santosh engaged with his brother Kishan about 2 years prior to the incident. About 2  months before the incident, his brother refused to accept the proposal of relationship due to which relations between his in-laws and his parents became strained. They stopped visiting his parents and his parents also stopped visiting his in-laws. On the day of occurrence, he was away and on return in the evening he found his wife dead. He alleged that his in-laws were demanding money which he did not give, and as a result, false case of dowry-death got registered against him.

15. In defence, the accused produced Ram Prakash, owner of Prakash Transport. He stated that on 26th August, 1991, accused-Manohar Lal was employed with him as driver of a truck and went to Kaithal. He came back at 5.00 P.M. and told him about the incident. He handed over the accused-Manohar Lal to the police.

16. Section 304B IPC relates to dowry death and reads as follows:

"304B. Dowry death.- (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death. Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

17. For the purpose of the said Section, a presumption can be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(a) Death of the woman was caused by burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances.

(b) Such death took place within seven years of her marriage.

(c) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(d) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry and

(e) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death.

17.1. In this connection, we may refer decision of this Court in Kaliaperumal v. State of Tamil Nadu [JT 2003 (7) SC 392].

18. In Sunil Bajaj v. State of M.P. [JT 2001 (8) SC 465], this Court held:

"5. We have given our attention and consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties. Normally this Court will be slow and reluctant, as it ought to be, to upset the order of conviction of the trial court as confirmed by the High Court appreciating the evidence placed on record. But in cases where both the courts concurrently recorded a finding that the accused was guilty of an offence in the absence of evidence satisfying the necessary ingredients of an offence, in other words, when no offence was made out, it becomes necessary to disturb such an order of conviction and sentence to meet the demand of justice. In order to convict an accused for an offence under Section 304-B IPC, the following essentials must be satisfied:

(1) the death of a woman must have been caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under normal circumstances;

(2) such death must have occurred within 7 years of her marriage;

(3) soon before her death, the woman must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or by relatives of her husband;

(4) such cruelty or harassment must be for or in connection with demand of dowry.

6. It is only when the aforementioned ingredients are established by acceptable evidence such death shall be called "dowry death" and such husband or his relative shall be deemed to have caused her death. It may be noticed that punishment for the offence of dowry death under Section 304-B is imprisonment of not less than 7 years, which may extend to imprisonment for life. Unlike under Section 498-A IPC, husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty shall be liable for imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. Normally, in a criminal case the accused can be punished for an offence on establishment of commission of that offence on the basis of evidence, maybe direct or circumstantial or both. But in case of an offence under Section 304-B IPC, an exception is made by deeming provision as to nature of death as "dowry death" and that the husband or his relative, as the case may be, is deemed to have caused such death, even in the absence of evidence to prove these aspects but on proving the existence of the ingredients of the said offence by convincing evidence. Hence, there is need for greater care and caution, that too having regard to the gravity of the punishment prescribed for the said offence, in scrutinizing the evidence and in arriving at the conclusion as to whether all the above-mentioned ingredients of the offence are proved by the prosecution. In the case on hand, the learned counsel for the appellant could not dispute that the first two ingredients mentioned above are satisfied."

19. The expression "soon before her death" used in the Section 304B IPC and Section 113B of the Evidence Act was considered by this Court in Hira Lal & Others v. State (Govt. of NCT), Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 195], which reads as under:

"8. Section 304-B IPC which deals with dowry death, reads as follows:

"304-B. Dowry death.-(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called 'dowry death', and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-section, 'dowry' shall have the same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

The provision has application when death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relatives of her husband for, or in connection with any demand for dowry. In order to attract application of Section 304-B IPC, the essential ingredients are as follows:

(i) The death of a woman should be caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under a normal circumstance.

(ii) Such a death should have occurred within seven years of her marriage.

(iii) She must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband.

(iv) Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with demand of dowry.

(v) Such cruelty or harassment is shown to have been meted out to the woman soon before her death. Section 113-B of the Evidence Act is also relevant for the case at hand. Both Section 304-B IPC and Section 113-B of the Evidence Act were inserted as noted earlier by Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act 43 of 1986 with a view to combat the increasing menace of dowry deaths. Section 113-B reads as follows:

"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.-When the question is whether a person has committed the 
dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected 
by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, 'dowry death' shall have the same meaning as in Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

The necessity for insertion of the two provisions has been amply analysed by the Law Commission of India in its 21st Report dated 10-8-1988 on "Dowry Deaths and Law Reform". Keeping in view the impediment in the pre-existing law in securing evidence to prove dowry-related deaths, the legislature thought it wise to insert a provision relating to presumption of dowry death on proof of certain essentials. It is in this background that presumptive Section 113-B in the Evidence Act has been inserted. As per the definition of "dowry death" in Section 304-B IPC and the wording in the presumptive Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, one of the essential ingredients, amongst others, in both the provisions is that the woman concerned must have been "soon before her death" subjected to cruelty or harassment "for or in connection with the demand of dowry". Presumption under Section 113-B is a presumption of law. On proof of the essentials mentioned therein, it becomes obligatory on the court to raise a presumption that the accused caused the dowry death. The presumption shall be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(1) The question before the court must be whether the accused has committed the dowry death of the woman. (This means that the presumption can be raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence under Section 304-B IPC.)

(2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for or in connection with any demand for dowry.

(4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death."

19.1. Similar observation was made by this Court in Balwant Singh and Another v. State of Punjab 
[2004 (7) SCC 724]. In the said case this Court held:

"10. These decisions and other decisions of this Court do lay down the proximity test. It has been reiterated in several decisions of this Court that "soon before" is an expression which permits of elasticity, and therefore the proximity test has to be applied keeping in view the facts and circumstances of each case. The facts must show the existence of a proximate live link between the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and the death of the victim."

20. In the present case, from the statement of PW.1 it appears that the death took place within seven years of marriage. Admittedly, death of the deceased was due to burning i.e. not in normal circumstances. We have to see now whether the remaining two ingredients are satisfied looking into the evidence on record.

21. The statement of the complainant PW.1 is general and not specific. No specific incidence has been indicated suggesting the cruelty or harassment made by the accused-Manohar Lal. Her statement is not reliable and not trustworthy. Though the allegation of demand of dowry was made none of the witnesses including PW.1 stated that the deceased was harassed "soon before her death" for or in connection with demand of dowry. The accused appellant was charge-sheeted under Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC but the Trial Court has not convicted the accused under Section 498-A. In this background, we are of the opinion that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove that the accused harassed the deceased soon before her death for or in connection with a demand of dowry.

22. For the reasons aforesaid, the judgment passed by the Trial Court dated 26th August, 1994 as upheld by the High Court by impugned judgment dated 26th March, 2007, cannot be upheld. They are accordingly set aside. The accused-Manohar Lal is acquitted from the charge under Section 304B IPC. The appeal is allowed. Bail Bonds, if any, stand discharged.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Indian Penal Code, 1860
Sections 304B and 498A - Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 113B - Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 - Section 2 - Dowry death - Presumption as to dowry death - Objective of introduction of the provisions - Essential ingredients of the offence - Burden of proving cruelty or harassment - Unnatural death of married woman within a few months of the marriage - Deceased found dead in the bed with marks of strangulation on both sides of neck and blood oozing from mouth - No evidence to show that the death was natural - Doctor opining that the possible cause of death was not ascertainable - Evidence establishing demand of dowry and ill treatment to the deceased shortly before the date of occurrence - Trial court convicting husband under Section 304B and sentencing him to ten years' imprisonment - High Court upholding the conviction but reducing the sentence to 7 years. Held since the evidence in record clearly established the commission of the offence by the accused his conviction and modified sentence imposed by High Court called for no interference. Appeal therefore dismissed.
HELD
In order to attract application of Section 304B IPC, the essential ingredients are as follows:-

(i) The death of a woman should be caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under a normal circumstance.

(ii) Such a death should have occurred within seven years of her marriage.

(iii) She must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband.

(iv) Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with demand of dowry.

(v) Such cruelty or harassment is shown to have been meted out to the woman soon before her death. (Para 9)

A conjoint reading of Section 113B of the Evidence Act and Section 304B IPC shows that there must be material to show that soon before her death, the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment. Prosecution has to rule out the possibility of a natural or accidental death so as to bring it within the purview of the 'death occurring otherwise than in normal circumstances'. The expression 'soon before' is very relevant where Section 113B of the Evidence Act and Section 304B IPC are pressed into service. Prosecution is obliged to show that soon before the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and only in that case presumption operates. Evidence in that regard has to be led by prosecution. 'Soon before' is a relative term and it would depend upon circumstances of each case and no strait-jacket formula can be laid down as to what would constitute a period of soon before the occurrence. It would be hazardous to indicate any fixed period, and that brings in the importance of a proximity test both for the proof of an offence of dowry death as well as for raising a presumption under Section 113B of the Evidence Act. The expression 'soon before her death' used in the substantive Section 304B IPC and Section 113B of the Evidence Act is present with the idea of proximity test. No definite period has been indicated and the expression 'soon before' is not defined. A reference to expression 'soon before' used in Section 114. Illustration (a) of the Evidence Act is relevant. It lays down that a Court may presume that a man who is in the possession of goods soon after the theft, is the thief who has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession. The determination of the period which can come within the term 'soon before' is left to be determined by the Courts, depending upon facts and circumstances of each case. Suffice, however, to indicate that the expression 'soon before' would normally imply that the interval should not be much between the concerned cruelty or harassment and the death in question. There must be existence of a proximate and live-link between the effects of cruelty based on dowry demand and the concerned death. If alleged incident of cruelty is remote in time and has become stale enough not to disturb mental equilibrium of the woman concerned, it would be of no consequence. (Para 10)

In the instant case, great stress has been laid on the opinion of the doctor that possible cause of death was not ascertainable. As noted by the trial Court and the High Court, black stained rough skin on both sides of neck was found. It has also been noticed by the doctor who conducted the post-mortem examination that blood stained fluid was trickling from the side of mouth and brain matters were found congested. The doctor unfortunately did not consider the effect of the marks on the neck and trickling of blood stained fluid from the mouth. The I.O. (PW-9) had seized a blood stained pillow. There was no evidence that the death was due to normal reasons. Evidence of PWs 1, 3 and 6 amply established demand of dowry and ill treatment of the deceased shortly before the date of occurrence. The trial Court and the High Court were justified in drawing the conclusion about guilt of the accused. Though attempt was made to show that had the accused been guilty he along with family members would not have tried to get treatment for the deceased. The reason for this is not far too seek. The accused person and others were trying to create a smoke screen. If the death was normal as claimed by the accused, nothing was brought on record to explain injuries on the neck of the deceased. The evidence on record clearly establishes the commission of offence by the accused. Therefore, the conviction and the modified sentence as imposed by the High Court do not suffer from any infirmity to warrant interference. (Para 14)

CASES REFERRED
1.Satvir Singh v. State of Punjab [JT 2001 (8) SC 208] (Para 13)

2.Akula Ravinder and others v. The State of Andhra Pradesh [AIR 1991 SC 1142] (Para 11)

ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. Marriages are made in heaven, is an adage. A bride leaves the parental home for the matrimonial home, leaving behind sweet memories therewith a hope that she will see a new world full of love in her groom's house. She leaves behind not only her memories, but also her surname, gotra and maidenhood. She expects not only to be a daughter-in-law, but a daughter in fact. Alas! the alarming rise in the number of cases involving harassment to the newly wed girls for dowry shatters the dreams. In-laws are characterized to be outlaws for perpetrating terrorism which destroys the matrimonial home. The terrorist is dowry, and it is spreading tentacles in every possible direction.

3. Appellant calls in question legality of the judgment rendered by a learned Single Judge of the Patna High Court upholding his conviction for offences punishable under Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short the 'IPC'), while reducing sentence to seven years rigorous imprisonment from ten years imprisonment as was awarded by learned Sessions Judge, Sitamarhi.

4. Prosecution version as unfolded during trial is as follows:

4.1. Jaikali Devi (hereinafter referred to as the deceased) was sister of the informant, Sudhir Kumar Mahto (PW-6). She was married to appellant in 1988. Duragaman was subsequently performed in the month of August, 1989. A sum of Rs.40,000/- was demanded in dowry at the time of marriage and the same was paid. Subsequently, demand for a she-buffalo was made by the appellant at the time of Duragaman which could not be fulfilled. Informant Sudhir Kumar Mahto (PW-6) went several times to the house of her sister and made request for Bidagari of her sister, but the same was not allowed, and on the contrary demand of she-buffalo was pressed. The deceased complained of ill-treatment and torture at the hands of the appellant and other members of his family. The informant was also abused. On 28.11.1989 at about 7.00 a.m., the informant heard some rumour in the village that her sister-the deceased was murdered by the appellant and his family members, and they were contemplating to dispose of the dead body. Thereafter, the informant along with his father Bachu Mahto (PW-3), brother Anup Mahto (PW-5) and uncle Bhuneshwar Mahto (PW-7) went to the village of the appellant and found that the dead body of her sister was lying in the verandah of the appellant's house and some blood was oozing from her mouth and there were mark of violence on her neck and it appeared that his sister was murdered by strangulation in the previous night. The officer In-charge of Kanhauli Police Station reached in the village Araria on hearing rumours about murder of a lady and he recorded the Fardbeyan (exhibit 1) of the informant. He sent Fardbeyan to the Officer In-charge of Kanhauli Police Station for instituting a case. He made inquest on the dead body of the deceased and prepared inquest report and sent the dead body to Sitamarhi Sadar Hospital for post mortem examination and a formal FIR was drawn up. The police after completion of investigation submitted charge sheet.

4.2. Appellant pleaded innocence. In order to further its version prosecution examined 9 witnesses. As noted above, Sudhir Kumar Mahto (PW-6) was the informant. According to his evidence shortly before the occurrence, he had talked with his sister i.e. the deceased, who told him about the tortures meted out to her for not bringing the dowry articles. To similar effect is the evidence of Dayanand Mahto (PW-1) who claimed to have accompanied PW-6 and heard deceased telling PW-6 about the torture. Bachu Mahto (PW-3) the father of the deceased also stated about the demand. PW-8 is the doctor who conducted the post-mortem. Three witnesses were examined by the accused to substantiate his plea that the deceased had rheumatic disease and she died because of this. The trial Court considered the evidence on record and came to hold that the presumption in terms of Section 113(B) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in short 'the Evidence Act') was to be drawn and since the deceased did not die a natural death as claimed, the accused was guilty of offence in terms of Section 304B IPC. It was noticed that there was no evidence to show that the deceased suffered from any rheumatic disease. The evidence of DWs was found to be unreliable. Accordingly, conviction in terms of Section 304B was recorded and ten years sentence was imposed.

5. Questioning the conviction and the sentence as awarded by the learned trial Judge, the accused filed an appeal before the High Court. As noted above, the High Court upheld the conviction but reduced the sentence.

6. In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the doctor (PW-8) had categorically stated that the cause of death was not ascertainable. The trial Court and the High Court were not justified in applying Section 304B IPC to the facts of the case. There was no live-link established between the alleged demand of dowry and the purported unnatural death. That being so, the conviction as recorded is not tenable.

7. In response, learned counsel for the State submitted that the Courts below have analysed the factual position in detail and found the accused-appellant guilty. That being so, no fault can be found with the orders of the courts below.

8. Section 304B IPC deals with dowry death which reads as follows:

" 304B. Dowry Death- (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death" and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section 'dowry' shall have same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2)Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

The provision has application when death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relatives of her husband for, or in connection with any demand for dowry.

9. In order to attract application of Section 304B IPC, the essential ingredients are as follows:-

(i) The death of a woman should be caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under a normal circumstance.

(ii) Such a death should have occurred within seven years of her marriage.

(iii) She must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband.

(iv) Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with demand of dowry.

(v) Such cruelty or harassment is shown to have been meted out to the woman soon before her death.

Section 113B of the Evidence Act is also relevant for the case at hand. Both Section 304B IPC and Section 113B of the Evidence Act were inserted by the Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act 43 of 1986 with a view to combat the increasing menace of dowry deaths. Section 113B reads as follows:-

" 113B: Presumption as to dowry death- When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman has been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation - For the purposes of this section 'dowry death' shall have the same meaning as in Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

The necessity for insertion of the two provisions has been amply analysed by the Law Commission of India in its 21st Report dated 10th August, 1988 on 'Dowry Deaths and Law Reform'. Keeping in view the impediment in the pre-existing law in securing evidence to prove dowry related deaths, legislature thought it wise to insert a provision relating to presumption of dowry death on proof of certain essentials. It is in this background presumptive Section 113B in the Evidence Act has been inserted. As per the definition of 'dowry death' in Section 304B IPC and the wording in the presumptive Section 113B of the Evidence Act, one of the essential ingredients, amongst others, in both the provisions is that the concerned woman must have been "soon before her death" subjected to cruelty or harassment "for or in connection with the demand of dowry". Presumption under Section 113B is a presumption of law. On proof of the essentials mentioned therein, it becomes obligatory on the Court to raise a presumption that the accused caused the dowry death. The presumption shall be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(1) The question before the Court must be whether the accused has committed the dowry death of a woman. (This means that the presumption can be raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence under Section 304B IPC).

(2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with any demand for dowry.

(4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death.

10. A conjoint reading of Section 113B of the Evidence Act and Section 304B IPC shows that there must be material to show that soon before her death, the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment. Prosecution has to rule out the possibility of a natural or accidental death so as to bring it within the purview of the 'death occurring otherwise than in normal circumstances'. The expression 'soon before' is very relevant where Section 113B of the Evidence Act and Section 304B IPC are pressed into service. Prosecution is obliged to show that soon before the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and only in that case presumption operates. Evidence in that regard has to be led by prosecution. 'Soon before' is a relative term and it would depend upon circumstances of each case and no strait-jacket formula can be laid down as to what would constitute a period of soon before the occurrence. It would be hazardous to indicate any fixed period, and that brings in the importance of a proximity test both for the proof of an offence of dowry death as well as for raising a presumption under Section 113B of the Evidence Act. The expression 'soon before her death' used in the substantive Section 304B IPC and Section 113B of the Evidence Act is present with the idea of proximity test. No definite period has been indicated and the expression 'soon before' is not defined. A reference to expression 'soon before' used in Section 114. Illustration (a) of the Evidence Act is relevant. It lays down that a Court may presume that a man who is in the possession of goods soon after the theft, is the thief who has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession. The determination of the period which can come within the term 'soon before' is left to be determined by the Courts, depending upon facts and circumstances of each case. Suffice, however, to indicate that the expression 'soon before' would normally imply that the interval should not be much between the concerned cruelty or harassment and the death in question. There must be existence of a proximate and live-link between the effects of cruelty based on dowry demand and the concerned death. If alleged incident of cruelty is remote in time and has become stale enough not to disturb mental equilibrium of the woman concerned, it would be of no consequence.

11. Consequences of cruelty which are likely to drive a woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health, whether mental or physical of the woman is required to be established in order to bring home the application of Section 498A IPC. Cruelty has been defined in the Explanation for the purpose of Section 498A. Substantive Section 498A IPC and presumptive Section 113A of the Evidence Act have been inserted in the respective statutes by Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Act, 1983. It is to be noted that Sections 304B and 498A, IPC cannot be held to be mutually inclusive. These provisions deal with two distinct offences. It is true that cruelty is a common essential to both the Sections and that has to be proved. The Explanation to Section 498A gives the meaning of 'cruelty'. In Section 304B there is no such explanation about the meaning of 'cruelty'. But having regard to common background to these offences it has to be taken that the meaning of 'cruelty' or 'harassment' is the same as prescribed in the Explanation to Section 498A under which 'cruelty' by itself amounts to an offence. Under Section 304B it is 'dowry death' that is punishable and such death should have occurred within seven years of marriage. No such period is mentioned in Section 498A. If the case is established, there can be a conviction under both the sections. (See Akula Ravinder and others v. The State of Andhra Pradesh1). Period of operation of Section 113B of the Evidence Act is seven years, presumption arises when a woman committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of marriage.

12. Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (in short 'Dowry Act') defines "dowry" as under:-

Section 2. Definition of 'dowry' - In this Act, 'dowry' means any property or valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or indirectly -

(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage; or

(b)by the parents of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to either party to the marriage or to any other person,

at or before or any time after the marriage in connection with the marriage of the said parties, but does not include dower or mehr in the case of persons to whom the Muslim personal law (Shariat) applies.

Explanation I- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any presents made at the time of a marriage to either party to the marriage in the form of cash, ornaments, clothes or other articles, shall not be deemed to be dowry within the meaning of this section, unless they are made as consideration for the marriage of the said parties.

Explanation II- The expression 'valuable security' has the same meaning in Section 30 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

13. The word "dowry" in Section 304B IPC has to be understood as it is defined in Section 2 of the Dowry Act. Thus, there are three occasions related to dowry. One is before the marriage, second is at the time of marriage and the third "at any time" after the marriage. The third occasion may appear to be unending period. But the crucial words are "in connection with the marriage of the said parties". Other payments which are customary payments e.g. given at the time of birth of a child or other ceremonies as are prevalent in different societies are not covered by the expression "dowry". (See Satvir Singh v. State of Punjab1) As was observed in said case "suicidal death" of a married woman within seven years of her marriage is covered by the expression "death of a woman is caused .......or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances" as expressed in Section 304B IPC.

14. In the instant case, great stress has been laid on the opinion of the doctor that possible cause of death was not ascertainable. As noted by the trial Court and the High Court, black stained rough skin on both sides of neck was found. It has also been noticed by the doctor who conducted the post-mortem examination that blood stained fluid was trickling from the side of mouth and brain matters were found congested. The doctor unfortunately did not consider the effect of the marks on the neck and trickling of blood stained fluid from the mouth. The I.O. (PW-9) had seized a blood stained pillow. There was no evidence that the death was due to normal reasons. Evidence of PWs 1, 3 and 6 amply established demand of dowry and ill treatment of the deceased shortly before the date of occurrence. The trial Court and the High Court were justified in drawing the conclusion about guilt of the accused. Though attempt was made to show that had the accused been guilty he along with family members would not have tried to get treatment for the deceased. The reason for this is not far too seek. The accused person and others were trying to create a smoke screen. If the death was normal as claimed by the accused, nothing was brought on record to explain injuries on the neck of the deceased. The evidence on record clearly establishes the commission of offence by the accused. Therefore, the conviction and the modified sentence as imposed by the High Court do not suffer from any infirmity to warrant interference.

15. The appeal is dismissed.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2009 AIR (SC) 1454
2008 (16) SCC 155
2008 (17) SCR 379
APPEARANCES
Mr. Mahabir Singh, Senior Advocate, Mr. Rakesh Dahiya, Mr. Gagan Deep Sharma and Mr. S. Srinivasan, Advocates with him for the Appellant.
Mr. Kuldip Singh and Mr. R.K. Pande, Advocates for the Respondent.
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Sections 302, 304B - Evidence Act, 1872, Section 113B - Dowry death - Death within 7 years of marriage at matrimonial home - FIR mentioning harassment by in-laws due to insufficient dowry and inability to bear child - Letters by appellant expressing unwillingness to live with deceased - Letter received ten days prior to incident mentioning that if she is not turned out, she will be murdered - Death due to consumption of insecticide - Appellants and family trying to conceal the reason of death - Sessions judge found all accused guilty - High Court acquitted all but appellant - Contention that neither in the FIR nor in the evidence of PW 5 dowry demand soon before the offence mentioned. Held there was no evidence that cruelty or harassment was given to deceased for bringing insufficient dowry hence ingredient of Section 304B was not satisfied and presumptive evidence could not be invoked. Though two injuries were found on the person of the deceased but appellant alone was made the accused. Had poison been forcefully administered others would have participated, but all others were acquitted. In view of the facts appellant cannot be held guilty. Appeal allowed.
HELD
What the High Court failed to notice in arriving at the said findings is that no evidence was brought on record to show that the cruelty or harassment was meted out to her for bringing insufficient dowry, in absence whereof the ingredients of Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code cannot be said to have been proved. The legal fiction sought to be created must be raised only on fulfillment of the conditions precedent therefor. All the requisite ingredients of the offence must be brought home before the presumptive evidence is put to use by the court for holding the accused guilty of an offence under Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code. (Para 16)

It is true that two injuries were noticed on the person of the deceased by the Autopsy Surgeon, but we could have considered this aspect of the matter had the appellant been not the only accused. The FIR was lodged against others also. Three more persons being sisters and cousin of the appellant were also charged for commission of the said offence. If the deceased was forced to take poison, they must have some hand in it. As they have been acquitted, it is difficult for us to come to the conclusion that it was the appellant and the appellant alone who was responsible for her death. (Para 22)

Section 304B - Offence under - Essential ingredients - Stated. (Para 10.2)

CASES REFERRED
1.T. Aruntperunjothi v. State through S.H.O. Pondicherry [JT 2006 (4) SC 300] (Para 18)

2.Harjit Singh v. State of Punjab [JT 2005 (10) SC 399] (Para 21)

3.Hira Lal & Ors. v. State (Govt. of NCT), Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 15] (Para 17)

S.B. SINHA, J.

1. Appellant was prosecuted for committing murder of his wife Amriko. They were married in the year 1983. Appellant was employed in the Army as a Naik. Indisputably, the parents of the deceased came from the lower strata of the society. They were very poor. The father of the deceased was working as a Mate in the Canal Department at Jaura Kothi. They were not in a position to give sufficient dowry to their daughter. At the time of marriage, they had given only few items, such as, utensils, beddings, clothes etc. After the marriage also, they had not been able to give anything to the deceased Amriko by way of dowry or otherwise.

1.1. Allegedly, on the ground that insufficient dowry had been brought by the deceased, she was tortured. The harassment increased as she was unable to bear a child. She used to be thrown out of the house. However, she used to be sent back by her parents. Her visit to the matrimonial home, when appellant visited the village upon obtaining leave, was mandatory. Some disputes appeared to have arisen as to whether the appellant himself on all the occasions should visit her parents' house to bring her back to the matrimonial home. On most of the occasions, the father of the appellant used to go to their place and bring her back.

1.2. A few days prior to the date of occurrence, appellant is said to have addressed a few letters, two of which were marked as Exhibit PJ & PH respectively; one of them was in 'Gurumukhi' language, the other being in English vernacular.

1.3. One letter was addressed by the appellant to his father and another which is in Gurumukhi script was addressed to the brother-in-law of the deceased. The common thread in both the letters appears to be that the appellant was unwilling to keep the deceased with him. It was stated that during his visit she should come herself or her parents must get her there.

1.4. Indisputably again, the deceased had mostly been residing with her parents. Ten days prior to the date of occurrence, the deceased came to her house and disclosed that Tarsem Singh had written a letter to her parents asking them to turn her out of the house or otherwise he would kill her. However, as appellant was to come home on leave, Harnam Singh, father of the appellant, came to her parents' place. When asked to allow Amriko to go with her, an apprehension was expressed by PW-5-Dato (mother of the deceased) in regard to the said letter and expressed her unwillingness to allow Amriko to go with him. She insisted that she would send Amriko only with Tarsem Singh. However, on assurance by Harnam Singh that no such threatening letter had been received and he treats her as his own daughter, she was allowed to go with him. After a few days, Sukhwinder Singh, brother of the deceased was sent to enquire about the welfare of Amriko and to find out whether Tarsem Singh had come on leave or not. He left his house at 11.00 a.m. but he came back some time thereafter to inform his mother that Amriko had been murdered by her in-laws. At about 4.00 p.m., a First Information Report (FIR) was lodged against Parmjit Kaur, Manjit Kaur, sisters of appellant, Mohinder Singh, cousin of appellant and Tarsem Singh, appellant.

2. Before the learned Sessions Judge, charges under Section 302 and in the alternative under Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code were framed.

3. All the four accused were found guilty for the offences punishable under Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code and convicted by the learned Sessions Judge. The High Court, however, while dismissing the appeal preferred by the appellant recorded a judgment of acquittal in favour of Parmjit Kaur, Manjit Kaur and Mohinder Singh.

4. Mr. Mahabir Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant would submit that the learned Sessions Judge as also the High Court committed a serious error in passing the impugned judgments of conviction and sentence insofar as they failed to take into consideration that neither in the FIR nor in the evidence of PW-5, any allegation was made to the effect that any dowry was demanded by the appellant. It was urged that in any view of the matter as the prosecution had not been able to show that any dowry was demanded soon before the commission of the offence, the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside.

5. Mr. Kuldip Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State, however, supported the impugned judgment.

6. Before us, the translated version of the FIR has been produced by Mr. Mahabir Singh to show that no allegation as regards demand of dowry had been made against the appellant. However, Mr. Kuldip Singh contended that upon reading of the FIR in its entirety it would appear that after the name of Tarsem Singh, the names of his parents, namely, Harnam Singh and Parsin Kaur had been mentioned and, thus, it is clear that all of them had been ill-treating Amriko for non-bringing of sufficient dowry and not bearing a child. The learned counsel appears to be correct.

7. It is, therefore, not correct to contend that FIR does not contain any statement of cruelty or harassment of the deceased for non-bringing of dowry. The marriage took place in the year 1983. The occurrence took place on 18.3.1987. The dead body was found in the matrimonial home of the deceased.

The post-mortem report showed that the following injuries were noticed on the person of the deceased:

"1. An abrasion 1 cm x .5 cm present on the left cheek. On dissection wound was skin deep.

2. A bluish contusion 3 cm x 2 cm present on the back of left wrist joint."

3. On dissection underlying skin and muscles were normal and underlying bone was not fractured."

8. It is not in dispute that death of Amriko took place due to consumption of organo phosphorus compound. Endocel, which is an insecticide of the chloroco compound group, was recovered. It is now not in dispute that Amriko died of consuming phosphorus compound.

9. Before embarking on further discussions on this issue, we may place on record that the appellant examined Niranjan Dass as DW-1, who is said to have examined the deceased before her death. He found her to be suffering from pain in her chest and breathlessness. According to him, she was suffering from pneumonia. Some medicines were allegedly prescribed for the said disease. Whether any medicine was administered to her or not is not clear. Although there are doubts about the veracity of the said statement, the fact that the appellant and his family tried to conceal the reason for the death of the deceased is of some significance.

10. The materials on record are not sufficient to bring home the charges under Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code.

10.1. Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code reads as under:

"304B. Dowry death.- (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation.- For the purpose of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

10.2. The essential ingredients of the said offence are: (i) death of a woman must have been caused by any burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under normal circumstances; (ii) such death must have been occurred within seven years of marriage (iii) soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or relative of her husband; (iv) such cruelty or harassment must be in connection with the demand of dowry; and (v) such cruelty is shown to have been meted out to the woman soon before her death.

10.3. Explanation appended to Section 304B defines dowry to have the same meaning as contained in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, which reads as under:

"2. Definition of 'dowry'.- In this Act, "dowry" means any property or valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or indirectly-

(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage; or

(b) by the parents of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to either party to the marriage or to any other person,

at or before or any time after the marriage in connection with the marriage of the said parties, but does not include dower or mahr in the case of persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) applied."

11. Parliament has inserted Section 113B in the Evidence Act, which reads as under:

"113B. Presumption as to dowry death. - When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman has been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this section "dowry death" shall have the same meaning as in Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)"

12. The necessity for insertion of the two provisions has been amply stated by the Law Commission of India in its 21st Report dated 10-8-1988 on "Dowry Deaths and Law Reform".

12.1. Keeping in view the impediments in the pre- existing law in securing evidence to prove dowry-related deaths, the Parliament in its wisdom thought to insert a provision relating to presumption of dowry death on proof of certain essentials.

12.2. It is in this background that a provision of presumptive evidence by way of Section 113B in the Evidence Act has been inserted.

12.3. As per the definition of "dowry death" in Section 304B IPC and the wording in the presumptive provision of Section 113B of the Evidence Act, one of the essential ingredients, amongst others, is that the 'woman' must have been "soon before her death" subjected to cruelty or harassment "for, or in connection with, the demand for dowry".

12.4. Presumption in terms of Section 113B is one of law. On proof of the essentials mentioned therein, it becomes obligatory on the court to raise a presumption that the accused caused the dowry death. The presumption shall be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(1) The question before the court must be whether the accused has committed the dowry death of a woman. (This means that the presumption can be raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence under Section 304B IPC.)

(2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry.

(4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death.

13. Harassment caused to the deceased was on three counts:

1. Insufficient dowry;

2. Inability to bear a child; and

3. Insistence by her parents that every time appellant must go to her parents' house for bringing her back.

14. It appears that FIR (Exhibit-PF/2) lodged by PW-5 emphasizes on two reasons of harassment, namely, (1) previously on the pretext of bringing in insufficient dowry, and (2) thereafter for not bearing a child.

15. There is, thus, nothing on record to show that any demand of dowry was made soon before her death. The cause of action for committing the offence appears to be an ego problem on the part of the appellant, namely, the deceased had not been coming to her matrimonial home on her own, while he had been coming to his home on leave.

The High Court also in its judgment recorded:

"It is proved from the evidence of PW-1 Dr. Manjit Singh that the death of Amriko had taken place due to consumption of Organo Phosphorus Compound. The prosecution has led evidence to prove that Endocel was got recovered by Parmjit Kaur, appellant, by making a disclosure statement. According to the Chemical report, Exhibit PN, Endocel is an insecticide of the chloroco compound group. Thus, this poison has not been consumed by Smt. Amriko and as such, it cannot be said that Parmjit Kaur or other appellants had given this poison forcibly to Smt. Amriko. The evidence shows that Smt. Amriko used to reside most of the time with her mother and whenever Tarsem Singh visited his house on leave from the Army, then he used to take Amriko from the house of her mother to the matrimonial home. The letter, Exhibit PH, shows that Tarsem Singh was aggrieved of the fact that he had to go to take Amriko from the house of her mother. He had also made clear that he would not keep Smt. Amriko any more. Thus, it was Tarsem Singh, appellant, alone who used to harass her. The other reason must be for harassing her was that she was not able to bear a child.

The statements of PW-5 Smt. Dato and PW-7 Sukhwinder Singh show that they have not stated in their police statements specifically that the appellants except Tarsem Singh used to harass her on account of dowry or that she was unable to bear a child. The very fact that Harnam Singh, father of Tarsem Singh, had taken her from the house of her mother about 8-10 days prior to the arrival of Tarsem Singh suggests that parents of Tarsem Singh wanted to keep her."

16. What the High Court failed to notice in arriving at the said findings is that no evidence was brought on record to show that the cruelty or harassment was meted out to her for bringing insufficient dowry, in absence whereof the ingredients of Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code cannot be said to have been proved. The legal fiction sought to be created must be raised only on fulfillment of the conditions precedent therefor. All the requisite ingredients of the offence must be brought home before the presumptive evidence is put to use by the court for holding the accused guilty of an offence under Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code.

17. In Hira Lal & Ors. v. State (Govt. of NCT), Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 15 ; 2003 (8) SCC 80], this Court held:

"9. A conjoint reading of Section 113B of the Evidence Act and Section 304B IPC shows that there must be material to show that soon before her death the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment. The prosecution has to rule out the possibility of a natural or accidental death so as to bring it within the purview of "death occurring otherwise than in normal circumstances". The expression "soon before" is very relevant where Section 113B of the Evidence Act and Section 304B IPC are pressed into service. The prosecution is obliged to show that soon before the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and only in that case presumption operates. Evidence in that regard has to be led by the prosecution. "Soon before" is a relative term and it would depend upon the circumstances of each case and no straitjacket formula can be laid down as to what would constitute a period of soon before the occurrence. It would be hazardous to indicate any fixed period, and that brings in the importance of a proximity test both for the proof of an offence of dowry death as well as for raising a presumption under Section 113B of the Evidence Act. The expression "soon before her death" used in the substantive Section 304B IPC and Section 113B of the Evidence Act is present with the idea of proximity test. No definite period has been indicated and the expression "soon before" is not defined. A reference to the expression "soon before" used in Section 114 Illustration (a) of the Evidence Act is relevant. It lays down that a court may presume that a man who is in the possession of goods "soon after the theft, is either the thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for their possession". The determination of the period which can come within the term "soon before" is left to be determined by the courts, depending upon facts and circumstances of each case. Suffice, however, to indicate that the expression "soon before" would normally imply that the interval should not be much between the cruelty or harassment concerned and the death in question. There must be existence of a proximate and live link between the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and the death concerned. If the alleged incident of cruelty is remote in time and has become stale enough not to disturb the mental equilibrium of the woman concerned, it would be of no consequence."

It was furthermore held:

"Consequences of cruelty which are likely to drive a woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health, whether mental or physical of the woman are required to be established in order to bring home the application of Section 498A IPC. Cruelty has been defined in the Explanation for the purpose of Section 498A. Substantive Section 498-A IPC and presumptive Section 113B of the Evidence Act have been inserted in the respective statutes by the Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Act, 1983. It is to be noted that Sections 304B and 498A IPC cannot be held to be mutually inclusive. These provisions deal with two distinct offences. It is true that cruelty is a common essential to both the sections and that has to be proved. The Explanation to Section 498-A gives the meaning of "cruelty". In Section 304B there is no such explanation about the meaning of "cruelty". But having regard to the common background of these offences it has to be taken that the meaning of "cruelty" or "harassment" is the same as prescribed in the Explanation to Section 498A under which "cruelty" by itself amounts to an offence. Under Section 304B it is "dowry death" that is punishable and such death should have occurred within seven years of marriage. No such period is mentioned in Section 498A. A person charged and acquitted under Section 304B can be convicted under Section 498A without that charge being there, if such a case is made out. If the case is established, there can be a conviction under both the sections (See Akula Ravinder v. State of A.P. [1991 (Supp. 2) SCC 99). Section 498A IPC and Section 113A of the Evidence Act include in their amplitude past events of cruelty. Period of operation of Section 113A of the Evidence Act is seven years; presumption arises as to dowry death when a woman committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of marriage.

18. In T. Aruntperunjothi v. State through S.H.O. Pondicherry [JT 2006 (4) SC 300 ; 2006 (9) SCC 467], this Court held:

"37. It, therefore, appears that no cogent evidence had been adduced by the prosecution to establish that the appellant had demanded any dowry. It would bear repetition to state that according to the mother of the deceased, PW-7 only PW-3 demanded dowry and only he was responsible for the death of her daughter. If that be so, he should have also been prosecuted."

19. Mr. Kuldip Singh, however, in our opinion, might be right in contending that on the materials on record it was possible for the trial court as also the High Court to pass a judgment of conviction against the appellant under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code as the death occurred in the matrimonial home. It was a homicidal death. Appellant in a statement under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure did not make any statement that the deceased committed suicide or it was an accidental one.

In a case of this nature, even Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act could be brought to use. However, it was not done. Appellant has been convicted only under Section 304B of the Code.

20. For the aforementioned purpose, the learned counsel wants us to invoke Section 386(b)(iii) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which reads as under:

"386 - Powers of the Appellate Court.- After perusing such record and hearing the appellant or his pleader, if he appears, and the Public Prosecutor, if he appears, and in case of an appeal under Section 377 or Section 378, the accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering, dismiss the appeal, or may--

(a) ............

(b) in an appeal from a conviction--

(i) ...............

(ii) ...............

(iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or the nature and extent, of 
the sentence, but not so as to enhance the same;"

21. In Harjit Singh v. State of Punjab [JT 2005 (10) SC 399 ; 2006 (1) SCC 463], this Court held:

"16. A legal fiction has been created in the said provision to the effect that in the event it is established that soon before the death, the deceased was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any of his relative; for or in connection with any demand of dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death"

Noticing the provisions of Section 113B of the Evidence Act, it was opined:

"17. From a conjoint reading of Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code and Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, it will be apparent that a presumption arising thereunder will operate if the prosecution is able to establish the circumstances as set out in Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code.

xxxxxxxxx

19. In the case of unnatural death of a married woman as in a case of this nature, the husband could be prosecuted under Section 302. Section 304B and Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code. The distinction as regards commission of an offence under one or the other provisions as mentioned hereinbefore came up for consideration before a Division Bench of this Court in Satvir Singh and Ors. v. State of Punjab and Anr. [JT 2001 (8) SC 208], wherein it was held :

"21.Thus, there are three occasions related to dowry. One is before the marriage, second is at the time of marriage and the third is "at any time" after the marriage. The third occasion may appear to be an unending period. But the crucial words are "in connection with the marriage of the said parties". This means that giving or agreeing to give any property or valuable security on any of the above three stages should have been in connection with the marriage of the parties. There can be many other instances for payment of money or giving property as between the spouses. For example, some customary payments in connection with birth of a child or other ceremonies are prevalent in different societies. Such payments are not enveloped within the ambit of "dowry". Hence the dowry mentioned in Section 304B should be any property or valuable security given or agreed to be given in connection with the marriage.

22. It is not enough that harassment or cruelty was caused to the woman with a demand for dowry at some time, if Section 304B is to be invoked. But it should have happened "soon before her death." The said phrase, no doubt, is an elastic expression and can refer to a period either immediately before her death or within a few days or even a few weeks before it. But the proximity to her death is the pivot indicated by that expression. The legislative object in providing such a radius of time by employing the words "soon before her death" is to emphasise the idea that her death should, in all probabilities, have been the aftermath of such cruelty or harassment. In other words, there should be a perceptible nexus between her death and the dowry-related harassment or cruelty inflicted on her. If the interval elapsed between the infliction of such harassment or cruelty and her death is wide the court would be in a position to gauge that in all probabilities the harassment or cruelty would not have been the immediate cause of her death. It is hence for the court to decide, on the facts and circumstances of each case, whether the said interval in that particular case was sufficient to snuff its cord from the concept "soon before her death"."

xxxxxxxxx

30. The ingredients of Section 306 and Section 304B are different and distinct. In any event, no evidence has been brought on record to show that there has been any act of omission or commission on the part of the accused, before the death of the deceased to demonstrate that the appellant was responsible for the same. We have noticed hereinbefore that the High Court, for the first time, in its judgment on a hypothesis observed that when her father came to see her, he must have been insulted or felt hurt as she might have been subjected to harassment. Unfortunately, no evidence whatsoever has been brought to our notice to enable us to sustain the said finding and in that view of the matter we are unable to accept the submissions of the learned Counsel appearing for the Respondent State."

22. It is true that two injuries were noticed on the person of the deceased by the Autopsy Surgeon, but we could have considered this aspect of the matter had the appellant been not the only accused. The FIR was lodged against others also. Three more persons being sisters and cousin of the appellant were also charged for commission of the said offence. If the deceased was forced to take poison, they must have some hand in it. As they have been acquitted, it is difficult for us to come to the conclusion that it was the appellant and the appellant alone who was responsible for her death.

23. For the aforementioned reasons, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained and it is set aside accordingly. The appeal is allowed. The appellant who is in custody is directed to be set at liberty and released forthwith unless wanted in connection with any other case.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2016 AIR (SC) 2319
HEADNOTE
EVIDENCE
Evidence Act, 1872
Sections 123 and 124 - Claim of privilege - Complaint of sexual harassment by appellant against two seniors - Separate enquiries made by separate committees - Disciplinary Authority considered reports of both committees and did not find sufficient material to proceed against Seniors - Whether appellant is entitled to get copy of the report - Union of India claimed privilege under Sections 123 and 124 of Evidence Act as disclosure of the contents of the report would be against national interest and would compromise national security - Reports and accompanying documents filed in the Court, not suggesting any threat to integrity of the country, if contents thereof are disclosed. Held how can Union of India claim privilege under Sections 123 and 124 in the matter of an enquiry of alleged sexual harassment. Such allegation has nothing to do with national security. Appellant is entitled to the report. Court master directed to hand over the report along with other documents to her.
HELD
We find it very odd that in a matter of an enquiry in respect of an allegation of sexual harassment, the Union of India should claim privilege under Sections 123 and 124 of the Evidence Act. The contents of Reports alleging sexual harassment can hardly relate to affairs of State or anything concerning national security. In any event, absolutely nothing has been shown to us to warrant withholding the Reports and the documents from the appellant in relation to the enquiry of allegations of sexual harassment made by the appellant against Sunil Uke and Ashok Chaturvedi. (Para 13)

We accordingly dispose of this appeal by holding that the appellant is entitled to the Reports in respect of the allegations made by her of sexual harassment by Sunil Uke and Ashok Chaturvedi and that none of the respondents have committed any contempt of court. In any case Ashok Chaturvedi has since passed away. (Para 15)

We direct the Union of India to supply to the appellant the missing pages of the deposition marked as Annexure Q-2 and Annexure Q-5 of the witnesses as well as the CD containing the deposition of six officers/staff recorded on 22nd April, 2008 and the CD containing the deposition of Sunil Uke. The needful be done within one week from today. (Para 18)


MADAN B. LOKUR, J.


1. Leave granted.

2. The appellant is aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 12th November, 2009 passed by the Delhi High Court in Contempt Case (C) No.449 of 2009. By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court held that the respondents had not committed any violation of the order dated 12th November, 2008 passed in W.P. (C) No.7971 of 2008.

3. In W.P. (C) No.7971 of 2008 the appellant had made several prayers but during the course of hearing in the High Court, five of the prayers were not pressed with liberty to take appropriate proceedings in accordance with law. The sixth prayer which was pressed related to respondent No.2 (Ashok Chaturvedi). It was prayed that he should be asked to proceed on leave pending the independent enquiry into the appellant's complaint of sexual harassment so that this respondent could not use his power and authority to influence any independent enquiry. As will be evident from the prayer, the enquiry relating to the allegation of sexual harassment made by the appellant was already pending. In the order dated 12th November, 2008 a direction was given by the High Court to expeditiously conclude the enquiry.

4. A few brief facts are necessary for a proper appreciation of the controversy before us.

5. The appellant had complained of sexual harassment by her senior Sunil Uke, Joint Secretary in the department and Ashok Chaturvedi. The allegation of sexual harassment by Sunil Uke was looked into by a Committee constituted for this purpose. The Committee gave its Report on 19th May, 2008.

6. A separate enquiry was held by a separate Committee into the allegation of sexual harassment by Ashok Chaturvedi. This Committee gave its Report on 23rd January, 2009.

7. In the Contempt Petition filed by the appellant in the Delhi High Court, it was brought out that the Committee inquiring into the allegation against Ashok Chaturvedi had since given its Report. It appears that pursuant to the Report an order dated 22nd September, 2009 was passed against the appellant but she disputed that this order was based on the Report. In any event, we are not concerned with the order dated 22nd September, 2009 except to say that it noted that the appellant's disciplinary authority had considered both Reports and had approved the conclusion that there was not enough evidence to take action against Sunil Uke or Ashok Chaturvedi.

8. Be that as it may, the controversy that arose during the pendency of the proceedings in the High Court and in this Court related to the entitlement of the appellant to a copy of the Report dated 23rd January, 2009. The High Court did not pass any substantive order relating to furnishing that Report to the appellant.

9. At this stage, it may be noted that on 7th July, 2014 this Court recorded that Ashok Chaturvedi had since passed away.

10. With respect to furnishing the Report dated 23rd January, 2009 an affidavit has been filed on behalf of the Union of India claiming privilege under Sections 123 and 124 of the Evidence Act. We have been taken through the affidavit dated 22nd July, 2010 and all that the affidavit says is that disclosure of the contents of the Report would be against national interest and would compromise national security. Apparently, this is only because the appellant happens to belong to the highly sensitive organization which is entrusted with the delicate job of collecting and analyzing intelligence inputs necessary to maintain the unity, integrity and sovereignty of the country.

11. Both the Reports and the accompanying documents have been filed by the Union of India in a sealed cover in this Court.

12. We have gone through both the Reports and the accompanying documents and find absolutely nothing therein which could suggest that there is any threat to the integrity of the country or anything contained therein would be detrimental to the interests of the country. We had also specifically asked the learned Additional Solicitor General to tell us exactly what portion of the Reports and the documents would be detrimental to the interests of the country but nothing could be pointed out during the hearing.

13. We find it very odd that in a matter of an enquiry in respect of an allegation of sexual harassment, the Union of India should claim privilege under Sections 123 and 124 of the Evidence Act. The contents of Reports alleging sexual harassment can hardly relate to affairs of State or anything concerning national security. In any event, absolutely nothing has been shown to us to warrant withholding the Reports and the documents from the appellant in relation to the enquiry of allegations of sexual harassment made by the appellant against Sunil Uke and Ashok Chaturvedi.

14. The Report relating to allegations of sexual harassment made by the appellant against Sunil Uke is not the subject matter of any dispute of controversy before us. However, since that Report has also been filed in this Court in a sealed cover, we did go through it and find nothing in the Report that would require it to be withheld from the appellant on any ground whatsoever.

15. We accordingly dispose of this appeal by holding that the appellant is entitled to the Reports in respect of the allegations made by her of sexual harassment by Sunil Uke and Ashok Chaturvedi and that none of the respondents have committed any contempt of court. In any case Ashok Chaturvedi has since passed away.

16. While going through the Report dated 19th May, 2008 we found that by mistake one or two pages of the deposition marked as Annexure Q-2 and Annexure Q-5 of the witnesses were not photocopied. Similarly, the CD containing the deposition of 6 officers/staff on 22nd April, 2008 has not been filed nor has the CD containing the deposition of Sunil Uke been filed in the sealed cover, perhaps to prevent damage to the CD.

17. We direct the Court Master to handover to the appellant the Report and documents pertaining to the enquiry in relation to the allegations made by the appellant against Sunil Uke and against Ashok Chaturvedi and which have been filed in this Court in a sealed cover.

18. We direct the Union of India to supply to the appellant the missing pages of the deposition marked as Annexure Q-2 and Annexure Q-5 of the witnesses as well as the CD containing the deposition of six officers/staff recorded on 22nd April, 2008 and the CD containing the deposition of Sunil Uke. The needful be done within one week from today.

19. With the above directions the appeal is disposed of.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Section 304B - Evidence Act, 1872, Section 113B - Dowry death - Death by consuming poison within 7 years of marriage - Complaint lodged by father, disclosed dowry harassment after 20-25 days of marriage, despite payment of dowry on eve of marriage - A sum of Rs. 20,000/- and later Rs. 25,000/- was given as dowry - Threats were given to deceased's brother - Deceased was made to leave matrimonial home when a further demand of Rs. 30,000/- was not met - Though she was brought back in June, 1996, demand persisted - On 26.6.1996, she died - Plea that deceased committed suicide not due to dowry harassment but due to mental depression. Held Section 304B does not categorise death as homicide, suicide or accidental. When all other ingredients are fulfilled, any death occurring in unnatural circumstances will be called dowry death. Words 'shall presume' in section 113B of 1872 Act leaves no option but to presume dowry death untill, accused prove their innocence. As per doctor DW2, deceased had developed suicidal tendencies due to harassment and cruelty by her-in-laws and she had told DW2 about it a month before her death. No effort was made by appellant no.2 (husband) to take deceased to hospital which was nearby. He falsely stated that he had left for Delhi to inform her parents about her death, but he never went there. Appellant no.1 (mother-in-law) also played a dominant role by accompanying appellant no.2 to all meetings for dowry demands. In view of ample evidence showing harassment for dowry soon before her unnatural death within seven year of marriage, High Court rightly dismissed the appeal against conviction.
HELD
There is ample evidence that the deceased was harassed, maltreated and was subjected to cruelty, for and in connection with the demands for dowry by the accused. Admittedly, appellant No. 2 was present in his office on 26.09.1996 located at M.D. University Campus at Rohtak but he did not attend to his wife at the relevant time. The assertion made by learned senior counsel for the appellants that the deceased was suffering from moderate depressing episode and was having suicidal tendencies prior to her death is of no consequence. Dr. V.P. Mehla (DW-2) was apprised by the deceased about the harassment and the maltreatment by her in-laws a month prior to her death when she was taken to the aforesaid doctor for the alleged treatment. According to DW-2, the deceased was so much depressed as a result of the act of cruelty meted out to her at the hands of the appellants that she developed suicidal tendencies. The testimony of DW-2 shows that the accused had created such a charged environment in her matrimonial home that she developed suicidal tendencies. Except appellant No. 1 herein, all were living in the house at Rohtak. Appellant No. 1 herein was a frequent visitor to that house and she herself admitted this fact in her statement under Section 313 of the Code. Thus, it is very much clear that accused persons maltreated, harassed and subjected the deceased to cruelty, after the solemnization of her marriage with the appellant No.2 herein, during her life time and soon before her death, for and in connection with the demands for dowry, who died at her matrimonial home within seven years of her marriage otherwise than in normal circumstances. (Para 20)

Section 304B IPC does not categorise death as homicidal or suicidal or accidental. This is because death caused by burns can, in a given case, be homicidal or suicidal or accidental. Similarly, death caused by bodily injury can, in a given case, be homicidal or suicidal or accidental. Finally, any death occurring "otherwise than under normal circumstances" can, in a given case, be homicidal or suicidal or accidental. Therefore, if all the other ingredients of Section 304B IPC are fulfilled, any death (homicidal or suicidal or accidental) whether caused by burns or by bodily injury or occurring otherwise than under normal circumstances shall, as per the legislative mandate, be called a "dowry death" and the woman's husband or his relative "shall be deemed to have caused her death". The section clearly specifies what constitutes the offence of dowry death and also identifies the single offender or multiple offenders who has or have caused the dowry death. (Para 21)

The key words under Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1872 are "shall presume" leaving no option with a court but to presume an accused brought before it of causing a dowry death guilty of the offence. However, the redeeming factor of this provision is that the presumption is rebuttable. Section 113B of the Act enables an accused to prove his innocence and places a reverse onus of proof on him or her. In the case on hand, accused persons failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased died a natural death. When Kavita allegedly committed suicide, her husband-appellant No.2, though he was not present in the house, was present in his office at M.D. University, Rohtak at the relevant time but he did not make any sincere effort to take her to the hospital which was very near to the place of the incident. Similarly, appellant No. 2 got the deceased examined by DW-2 in order to create an impression that she was struggling with chronic depression but the truth floated upon the surface when the deceased reveals that the accused persons were maltreating her and she had started picking up the ideas of suicide. Lastly, appellant No. 2 falsely informed the court that having learnt about the death of his wife Kavita, he left for Delhi to inform her family members. In fact, the accused never went to Delhi and the complainant received a telephonic message from an unknown person regarding the death of his daughter. So far as Maya Devi- appellant No. 1 herein is concerned, there is no denying the fact that she was working as a teacher in a government school and she was not present at the relevant time at the place of incident but it is very much clear from the evidence on record that both the accused persons had a dominating role in the entire episode and she had always accompanied her son-appellant No. 2 herein to the house of the complainant (PW-3) for the dowry demands. The presumption under Section 113B of the Act is mandatory may be contrasted with Section 113A of the Act which was introduced contemporaneously. Section 113A of the Act, dealing with abetment of suicide, uses the expression "may presume". This being the position, a two-stage process is required to be followed in respect of an offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC: it is necessary to first ascertain whether the ingredients of the Section have been made out against the accused; if the ingredients are made out, then the accused is deemed to have caused the death of the woman but is entitled to rebut the statutory presumption of having caused a dowry death. From the evidence on record, we are of the opinion that in the present case Kavita died an unnatural death by committing suicide as she was subjected to cruelty/harassment by her husband and in-laws in connection with the demand for dowry which started from the time of her marriage and continued till she committed suicide. Thus, the provisions of Sections 304B and 498A of the IPC will be fully attracted. (Para 22)

CASES REFERRED
1.Ramesh Vithal Patil v. State of Karnataka [JT 2014 (8) SC 219] (Para 19)

2.Mustafa Shahadal Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2012 (9) SC 20] (Para 18)

3.Bansi Lal v. State of Haryana [JT 2011 (5) SC 373] (Para 17)

4.Durga Prasad and Another v. State of Madhya Pradesh [JT 2010 (8) SC 28] (Para 7)

5.Satvir Singh and Others v. State of Punjab and Another [JT 2001 (8) SC 208] (Para 8)

6.Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra [1984 (4) SCC 116] (Para 5)

R.K. AGRAWAL, J.

1. This appeal has been filed against the judgment and order dated 14.01.2010 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No. 488-DB of 1999 whereby the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the appeal.

2. Brief facts:

(a) As per the prosecution story, the marriage of Kavita @ Kusum (since deceased) was solemnized with Karamvir, son of Mahavir, resident of House No. 36, Type II, M.D. University Campus, Rohtak according to Hindu rites and ceremonies on 17.07.1994. After 20-25 days of the solemnization of the marriage, Karamvir (appellant No. 2 herein), his mother Maya Devi (appellant No. 1 herein), brothers Dharamveer and Paramveer and Sister Sonika@Pinki started harassing, maltreating and beating Kavita (since deceased) on account of dowry. Despite all efforts, the attitude and relations of her in-laws towards her went from bad to worse.

(b) On 26.09.1996, the police got a telephonic message from a stranger at 3:30 a.m. that the dead body of a woman was lying in House No. 36, Type II, M.D. University Campus, Rohtak. On coming to know about the incident, Kanwar Singh (the complainant) - father of Kavita reached the spot and identified the body to be that of his daughter.

(c) A complaint was lodged by Kanwar Singh (PW-3) at the P.S. Civil Lines, Rohtak regarding the incident on 27.09.1996 alleging torture and harassment meted out to the deceased on account of demand of dowry who had committed suicide by consuming some poisonous substance. On the basis of the said complaint, FIR No. 466 of 1966 was registered under Sections 498A, 304B, 306/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short 'the IPC'). After investigation, charges under Sections 498A and 304B read with Section 34 of the IPC were framed against the accused persons.

(d) The case was committed to the Court of Sessions and numbered as 11/10.04.1997 and Maya Devi-mother-in-law of the deceased (appellant No. 1 herein), Karamvir-husband of the deceased (appellant No. 2 herein) and Dharamveer and Paramveer-brothers of Karamvir were arrayed as accused.

(e) The Court of Sessions Judge, Rohtak, by order dated 22/27.09.1999, while acquitting Dharamveer and Paramveer -brothers of Karamvir, convicted the appellant Nos. 1 and 2 herein for the commission of offence under Sections 498A and 304B of the IPC and sentenced them to suffer rigorous imprisonment (RI) for life under Section 304B of the IPC. Both the accused were further sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment (RI) for 2 (two) years, along with a fine of Rs. 500/- each, for the offence under Section 498A of the IPC.

(f) Being aggrieved, the appellant herein filed Criminal Appeal No. 488- DB of 1999 before the High Court. Kanwar Singh-the complainant also filed Criminal Revision No. 208 of 2000 before the High Court for setting aside the judgment and order dated 22/27.09.1999 to the extent of acquittal of Dharamveer and Paramveer.

(g) The Division Bench of the High Court, by order dated 14.01.2010, dismissed the appeal filed by the appellants herein while modifying the sentence of life imprisonment to that of rigorous imprisonment for 10 years for the offence under Section 304B while maintaining the sentence in respect of other offence. The Division Bench also dismissed the revision filed by the complainant.

(h) Aggrieved by the said judgment, the appellants have preferred this appeal by way of special leave before this Court.

3. Heard Mr. T.S. Doabia, learned senior counsel for the appellants and Mr. Narender Hooda, learned senior counsel for the respondent-State.

Rival Submissions:

4. Learned senior counsel for the appellants submitted before this Court that Kavita (since deceased) was suffering from mental depression and psychosis and no case has been made out for bringing the same within the definition of dowry as contained in the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. Learned senior counsel further contended that she was suffering from mental depression even before her marriage. Her brother and uncle used to administer anti-depression medicines to her secretly. In support of the same, learned senior counsel relied upon the deposition of Dr. V.P. Mehla, MD, Consultant Psychiatric Centre, Civil Hospital, Rohtak who deposed as under:-

"Kavita wife of Karambir remained under my treatment and because I have seen her in the OPD on 26.08.1996 vide OPD No. 1034/96. Ex. DC is her OPD slip. As per my record, patient was suffering from moderate depressing episode. The patient suffered from sadness of mood, absent mindless, loss of interest in the usual activities, decreased sleep and appetite for the last two month, when I first saw her. On mental status examination by me, she was found to have said, irritable facets. She was having depressed mood and expressed pessimistic ideas and complained against her in-laws and husband. She also expressed occasional suicidal ideas. Her Judgment and insight was read to be fair by me. On the basis of above findings, I judged her to be suffering from moderate depressive episode and I had prescribed her capsule flute 20 mg. / OD and I have counseled her and her husband who had accompanied her, regarding the needful treatment and importance of psychosocial support in this disease. History of the patient is contained in Ex. DB.

XXX'C. Question : How much time did you take examining patient Kavita in this case?

Ans :- I can give no time in this case but routine I used to take new patient 20 to 30 minutes.

I have not mentioned any marks of identification or signatures of the patient Kavita in Ex. DD. Whatever was stated by husband of the patient was recorded in Ex. DD. (Volunteered that Chief Complaints recorded in Ex. DD were told by patient's husband and patient herself). I cannot specifically state as to what was told by the patient and what was by her husband, Ex. DD contains the mixture of observation of the complaints of patient and her husband. It is correct that patient only came to me on 26.08.1996. There is no pagination in the patient register but serial no. has been maintained. There is one entry only on 26.08.1996 and that is at the fag end of the page. Besides Kavita, who was examined on 26.8.96 as a new patient, I also examined old patients on the said date and their registration no is mentioned as 226/94 and 983/96 by the side of entry no. 1034. Patient had this illness as first episode. As per my record there was no family or past history of psychiatric illness. Moderate depressing episode is a diagnostic category as defined in ICD/10 as a depressive illness with symptoms of depression with moderate intensity. In an expert hand, this disease is 100% curable. I did not feel the need of any test of the patient. In a predisposed individual any kind of stress can lead to the precipitation of a depressive disease and illness. It is incorrect to suggest that I have deposed falsely."

5. In view of the above, learned senior counsel relied upon a decision of this Court in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra [1984 (4) SCC 116] wherein it was held as under:-

"40. Thus, from the recitals in the letters we can safely hold that there was a clear possibility and a tendency on her part to commit suicide due to desperation and frustration. She seems to be tired of her married life, but she still hoped against hope that things might improve. At any rate, the fact that she may have committed suicide cannot be safely excluded or eliminated. It may be that her husband may have murdered her but when two views are reasonably possible the benefit must go to the accused. In order to buttress our opinion, we would like to cite some passages of an eminent psychiatrist, Robert J. Kastenbaum where in his book Death, Society and Human Experience he analyses the causes, the circumstances, the moods and emotions which may drive a person to commit suicide. The learned author has written that a person who is psychotic in nature and suffers from depression and frustration is more prone to commit suicide than any other person. In support of our view, we extract certain passages from his book:

"The fact is that some people who commit suicide can be classified as psychotic or severely disturbed.

If we are concerned with the probability of suicide in very large populations, then mental and emotional disorder is a relevant variable to consider.

And it is only through a gross distortion of the actual circumstances that one could claim all suicides are enacted in a spell of madness.

Seen in these terms, suicide is simply one of the ways in which a relatively weak member of society loses out in the jungle-like struggle.

The individual does not destroy himself in hope of thereby achieving a noble post-mortem reputation or a place among the eternally blessed. Instead he wishes to subtract himself from a life whose quality seems a worse evil than death,

The newly awakened spirit of hope and progress soon became shadowed by a sense of disappointment and resignation that, it sometimes seemed, only death could swallow,

Revenge fantasies and their association with suicide are well known to people who give ear to those in emotional distress.

People who attempt suicide for reasons other than revenge may also act on the assumption that, in a sense, they will survive the death to benefit by its effect.

* * *

The victim of suicide may also be the victim of self-expectations that have not been fulfilled. The sense of disappointment and frustration may have much in common with that experienced by the person who seeks revenge through suicide.... However, for some people a critical moment arrives when the discrepancy is experienced as too glaring and painful to be tolerated. If something has to go it may be the person himself, not the perhaps excessively high standards by which the judgment has been made.... Warren Breed and his colleagues found that a sense of failure is prominent among many people who take their own lives.

41. The above observations are fully applicable to the case of Manju. She solemnly believed that her holy union with her husband would bring health and happiness to her but unfortunately it seems to have ended in a melancholy marriage which in view of the circumstances detailed above, left her so lonely and created so much of emotional disorder resulting from frustration and pessimism that she was forced to end her life. There can be no doubt that Manju was not only a sensitive and sentimental woman but was extremely impressionate (sic) and the letters show that a constant conflict between her mind and body was going on and unfortunately the circumstances which came into existence hastened her end. People with such a psychotic philosophy or bent of mind always dream of an ideal and if the said ideal fails, the failure drives them to end their life, for they feel that no charm is left in their life.

42. Mary K. Hinchliffe, Douglas Hooper and F. John Roberts in their book The Melancholy Marriage observe that-

"Studies of attempted suicide cases have also revealed the high incidence of marital problems which lie behind the act. In our own study of 100 consecutive cases (Roberts and Hooper 1969), we found that most of them could be understood if the patients' interactions with others in their environment were considered." (p. 5)

43. Such persons possess a peculiar psychology which instills extreme love and devotion but when they are faced with disappointment or find their environment so unhealthy or unhappy, they seem to lose all the charms of life. The authors while describing these sentiments observe thus:

"'Hopelessness', 'despair', 'lousy' and 'miserable' draw attention to the relationship of the depressed person 'to his environment. The articulate depressed person will often also struggle to put into words the fact that not only does there appear to be no way forward and thus no point to life - but that the world actually looks different." (p. 7)

44. Coleridge in Ode to Dejection in his usual ironical manner has very beautifully explained the sentiments of such persons thus:

"I see them all so excellently fair -

I see, not feel, how beautiful they are;"

45. At another place the authors (Hinchliffe, Hooper, and John) come to the final conclusion that ruptured personal relationships play a major part in the clinical picture and in this connection observed thus:

"Initially we applied these ideas to study of cases of attempted suicide (Roberts and Hooper 1969) and although we did not assume that they were all necessarily depressed, we looked for distal and proximal causes for their behaviour and found that ruptured personal relationships played a major part in the clinical picture."

The observations of the authors aptly and directly apply to the nature, mood and the circumstances of the unfortunate life of Manju which came to an end within four months of her marriage."

6. Learned senior counsel further submitted that Kavita had committed suicide on account of the fact that she was mentally depressed and no case is made out under Section 304B of the IPC as the requirement of law is that the harassment and cruelty should be "soon before her death" and no evidence has come on record for this purpose. In order to bring home conviction under Section 304B of the IPC, it will not be sufficient to only lead evidence showing that cruelty or harassment had been meted out to the victim, but that such treatment was in connection with the demand for dowry. The phrase, "soon before her death", no doubt, is an elastic expression and can refer to a period either immediately before her death or within a few days or even a few weeks before it. But the proximity to her death is the pivot indicated by that expression. The legislative intent in providing such a radius of time by employing the words "soon before her death" is to emphasis the idea that her death should, in all probabilities, has been the aftermath of such cruelty or harassment. There should be a perceptible nexus between her death and the dowry related harassment or cruelty inflicted on her.

7. In support of the above contention, learned senior counsel for the appellants referred to a decision of this Court in Durga Prasad and Another v. State of Madhya Pradesh [JT 2010 (8) SC 28 : 2010 (9) SCC 73] wherein it was held as under:-

7. It was pointed out that the only evidence on which reliance had been placed both by the trial court, as well as the High Court, for convicting the appellants, was the evidence of Vimla Bai, PW 1, the mother of the deceased and Radheshyam, PW 3, the brother of the deceased. In fact, the prosecution story was that since no dowry had been received from the family of the victim, she had been beaten and treated with cruelty. There is no other evidence regarding the physical and mental torture which the deceased was alleged to have been subjected to.

8. Mr. Gupta urged that the marriage of Appellant 1 with the deceased was performed as part of a community marriage being celebrated on account of the poverty of couples who could not otherwise meet the expenses of marriage and that even the few utensils which were given at the time of such community marriage were given by the persons who had organised such marriages.

9. Mr. Gupta submitted that the evidence in this case was wholly insufficient to even suggest that the victim had been subjected to cruelty or harassment which was sufficient to compel her to commit suicide. In support of his submissions, Mr Gupta firstly referred to the decision of this Court in Biswajit Halder v. State of W.B. wherein, in facts which were very similar, it was held that there was practically no evidence to show that there was any cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, the demands for dowry. There was also no finding in that regard. It was further observed that this deficiency in evidence proved fatal for the prosecution case and even otherwise mere evidence of cruelty and harassment was not sufficient to attract Section 304-B IPC. It had to be shown in addition that such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with, demand of dowry. Mr Gupta urged that since the appellants had not been convicted under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, the charge under Section 304-B would also fail since the same was linked with the question of cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, the demand for dowry.

14. Ms. Makhija then contended that as had been laid down by this Court in Anand Kumar v. State of M.P., in order to counter the presumption available under Section 113-B, which is relatable to Section 304-B, a heavy burden has been shifted on to the accused to prove his innocence. Having regard to the language of Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, which indicates that when a question arises as to whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by such other person or in connection with any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused such dowry death. Ms. Makhija urged that the aforesaid wording of Section 113-B of Evidence Act and the use of the expression "shall" would clearly indicate that the court shall presume such death as dowry death provided the conditions in Section 113-B were satisfied and it would then be for the accused to prove otherwise.

15. Ms Makhija, thereupon, urged that the order of conviction passed by the trial court holding the appellants guilty under Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC, confirmed by the High Court, did not warrant any interference by this Court.

16. Having carefully considered the submissions made on behalf of the respective parties, we are inclined to allow the benefit of doubt to the appellants having particular regard to the fact that except for certain bald statements made by PWs 1 and 3 alleging that the victim had been subjected to cruelty and harassment prior to her death, there is no other evidence to prove that the victim committed suicide on account of cruelty and harassment to which she was subjected just prior to her death, which, in fact, are the ingredients of the evidence to be led in respect of Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, 1872, in order to bring home the guilt against an accused under Section 304-B IPC.

17. As has been mentioned hereinbefore, in order to hold an accused guilty of an offence under Section 304-B IPC, it has to be shown that apart from the fact that the woman died on account of burn or bodily injury, otherwise than under normal circumstances, within 7 years of her marriage, it has also to be shown that soon before her death, she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry. Only then would such death be called "dowry death" and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused the death of the woman concerned.

18. In this case, one other aspect has to be kept in mind, namely, that no charges were framed against the appellants under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 and the evidence led in order to prove the same for the purposes of Section 304-B IPC was related to a demand for a fan only.

19. The decision cited by Mr R.P. Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, in Biswajit Halder case was rendered in almost similar circumstances. In order to bring home a conviction under Section 304-B IPC, it will not be sufficient to only lead evidence showing that cruelty or harassment had been meted out to the victim, but that such treatment was in connection with the demand for dowry. In our view, the prosecution in this case has failed to fully satisfy the requirements of both Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, 1872 and Section 304-B of the Penal Code.

8. Learned senior counsel further relied upon Satvir Singh and Others v. State of Punjab and Another [JT 2001 (8) SC 208] which is as under:-

"21. Thus, there are three occasions related to dowry. One is before the marriage, second is at the time of marriage and the third is "at any time" after the marriage. The third occasion may appear to be an unending period. But the crucial words are "in connection with the marriage of the said parties". This means that giving or agreeing to give any property or valuable security on any of the above three stages should have been in connection with the marriage of the parties. There can be many other instances for payment of money or giving property as between the spouses. For example, some customary payments in connection with birth of a child or other ceremonies are prevalent in different societies. Such payments are not enveloped within the ambit of "dowry". Hence the dowry mentioned in Section 304-B should be any property or valuable security given or agreed to be given in connection with the marriage.

22. It is not enough that harassment or cruelty was caused to the woman with a demand for dowry at some time, if Section 304-B is to be invoked. But it should have happened "soon before her death". The said phrase, no doubt, is an elastic expression and can refer to a period either immediately before her death or within a few days or even a few weeks before it. But the proximity to her death is the pivot indicated by that expression. The legislative object in providing such a radius of time by employing the words "soon before her death" is to emphasise the idea that her death should, in all probabilities, have been the aftermath of such cruelty or harassment. In other words, there should be a perceptible nexus between her death and the dowry-related harassment or cruelty inflicted on her. If the interval elapsed between the infliction of such harassment or cruelty and her death is wide the court would be in a position to gauge that in all probabilities the harassment or cruelty would not have been the immediate cause of her death. It is hence for the court to decide, on the facts and circumstances of each case, whether the said interval in that particular case was sufficient to snuff its cord from the concept "soon before her death"."

9. Learned senior counsel for the appellants further contended that so far as Maya Devi-appellant No. 1 herein is concerned, she was not staying at Rohtak at the relevant time and she was a teacher in Municipal School at Delhi which is apparent from the statement of Smt. Rajbala (DW-3), Head Mistress, Nagar Nigam Prathmik Balika Vidyalaya, Ladpur, Delhi as also from the investigation and the case of the prosecution. Even, Karamvir-husband of the deceased was not present in the house when Kavita committed the act of suicide. He finally contended that there is nothing on record to show that any demand for dowry was made and she meted out cruelty or harassment soon before her death. Learned senior counsel further contended that even for the purpose of Section 498A the evidence is lacking.

10. On the other hand, learned senior counsel for the respondent-State submitted that there is no dispute that Kavita died on 26.09.1996 in her matrimonial home otherwise than under normal circumstances due to poisoning. Admittedly, there were persistent demands put up by the accused right from the solemnization of the marriage which continued till the date of the death of the deceased. He further contended that the accused had been maltreating, harassing and subjecting her to cruelty for the fulfillment of their demands for additional dowry. It was next contended that in the present case, besides Kavita, the accused had also humiliated Pankaj (PW-4) - brother of the deceased. When PW-4 visited the house of the accused with some ceremonial articles on the day of 'sakrant', the accused expressed displeasure upon the articles brought by him. He further contended that the claim that the deceased was suffering from moderate depressing episode and was having suicidal tendencies prior to her death which had come true on 26.09.1996 is hardly of any consequence. A series of transactions of maltreatment and cruelty which commenced just 20-25 days after the solemnization of the marriage of the deceased with appellant No.2 herein and culminated on the date of the death of the deceased would go a long way to show that she was harassed, maltreated and was subjected to cruelty soon before her death for and in connection with the demands for dowry. It was further submitted that the deceased was so much depressed as a result of cruelty/harassment meted out to her at the hands of the appellants that she developed the suicidal tendencies. He further submitted that the accused had created such a vicious and charged atmosphere in the matrimonial home that Kavita (since deceased) started picking up the ideas of committing suicide.

11. Learned senior counsel for the respondent-State vehemently contended that all the accused except appellant No. 1 were living in a house and the claim of the appellants that there is no point of involvement of Maya Devi in the whole incident is wholly irrelevant as she too was a frequent visitor to Rohtak as admitted by her in the statement made under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short 'the Code') and there is sufficient evidence on record to show that as and when the demands were put up by the accused to the complainant party, Maya Devi always accompanied her son.

12. Learned senior counsel for the respondent-State finally contended that the trial Court rightly convicted and sentenced the appellants under Section 304B and 498A of the IPC and the High Court upheld the same with some modification in the sentence. The appellants deserve a deterrent punishment in the present case.

Discussion:

13. Before considering the prosecution case as well as the defence pleaded, it is desirable to extract the relevant provisions of Section 304B which relates to dowry death:

"304B. Dowry death.-(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called 'dowry death', and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-section, 'dowry' shall have the same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

The above provision was inserted by Act 43 of 1986 and came into force with effect from 19.11.1986. There is no dispute about the applicability of the above provision since the marriage and the death occurred in the year 1994 and 1996 respectively.

14. In order to convict an accused for the offence punishable under Section 304B IPC, the following essentials must be satisfied:

(i) the death of a woman must have been caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under normal circumstances;

(ii) such death must have occurred within seven years of her marriage;

(iii) soon before her death, the woman must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relatives of her husband;

(iv) such cruelty or harassment must be for, or in connection with, demand for dowry.

14.1. When the above ingredients are established by reliable and acceptable evidence, such death shall be called dowry death and such husband or his relatives shall be deemed to have caused her death. If the above-mentioned ingredients are attracted in view of the special provision, the court shall presume and it shall record such fact as proved unless and until it is disproved by the accused. However, it is open to the accused to adduce such evidence for disproving such conclusive presumption as the burden is unmistakably on him to do so and he can discharge such burden by getting an answer through cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses or by adducing evidence on the defence side.

15. Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1872 speaks about presumption as to dowry death which reads as under:

"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.-When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman has been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, 'dowry death' shall have the same meaning as in Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

15.1. As stated earlier, the prosecution under Section 304B IPC cannot escape from the burden of proof that the harassment or cruelty was related to the demand for dowry and such was caused "soon before her death". In view of the Explanation to the said section, the word "dowry" has to be understood as defined in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 which reads as under:

"2. Definition of 'dowry'.-In this Act, 'dowry' means any property or valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or indirectly-

(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage; or

(b) by the parent of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to either party to the marriage or to any other person, at or before or any time after the marriage in connection with the marriage of the said parties, but does not include dower or mahr in the case of persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) applies."

16. To attract the provisions of Section 304B, one of the main ingredients of the offence which is required to be established is that "soon before her death" she was subjected to cruelty or harassment "for, or in connection with the demand for dowry". The expression "soon before her death" used in Section 304B IPC and Section 113B of the Evidence Act is present with the idea of proximity test. In fact, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that there is no proximity for the alleged demand of dowry and harassment. With regard to the said claim, we shall advert to while considering the evidence led in by the prosecution. Though the language used is "soon before her death", no definite period has been enacted and the expression "soon before her death" has not been defined in both the enactments. Accordingly, the determination of the period which can come within the term "soon before her death" is to be determined by the courts, depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case. However, the said expression would normally imply that the interval should not be much between the cruelty or harassment concerned and the death in question. In other words, there must be existence of a proximate and live link between the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and the death concerned. If the alleged incident of cruelty is remote in time and has become stale enough not to disturb the mental equilibrium of the woman concerned, it would be of no consequence.

17. The aforesaid provisions were considered by this Court in Bansi Lal v. State of Haryana [JT 2011 (5) SC 373 : 2011 (11) SCC 359] wherein it was held that while considering the case under Section 304B cruelty has to be proved during the close proximity of the time of death and it should be continuous and such continuous harassment, physical or mental, by the accused should make life of the deceased miserable which may force her to commit suicide. This Court further held that where the cruelty has been proved during the close proximity of the time of death then the provisions of Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 providing for presumption that the accused is responsible for dowry death, have to be pressed in service. In paras 19 and 20 of the judgment, this Court has further held as follows:-

"19. It may be mentioned herein that the legislature in its wisdom has used the word "shall" thus, making a mandatory application on the part of the court to presume that death had been committed by the person who had subjected her to cruelty or harassment in connection with any demand of dowry. It is unlike the provisions of Section 113-A of the Evidence Act where a discretion has been conferred upon the court wherein it had been provided that court may presume abetment of suicide by a married woman. Therefore, in view of the above, onus lies on the accused to rebut the presumption and in case of Section 113-B relatable to Section 304-B IPC, the onus to prove shifts exclusively and heavily on the accused. The only requirements are that death of a woman has been caused by means other than any natural circumstances; that death has been caused or occurred within 7 years of her marriage; and such woman had been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband in connection with any demand of dowry.

20. Therefore, in case the essential ingredients of such death have been established by the prosecution, it is the duty of the court to raise a presumption that the accused has caused the dowry death. It may also be pertinent to mention herein that the expression "soon before her death" has not been defined in either of the statutes. Therefore, in each case, the Court has to analyse the facts and circumstances leading to the death of the victim and decide if there is any proximate connection between the demand of dowry and act of cruelty or harassment and the death."

18. This Court, in Mustafa Shahadal Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2012 (9) SC 20 : 2012 (11) SCC 397] held as under:-

"9. In order to convict an accused for the offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC, the following essentials must be satisfied:

(i) the death of a woman must have been caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under normal circumstances;

(ii) such death must have occurred within seven years of her marriage;

(iii) soon before her death, the woman must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relatives of her husband;

(iv) such cruelty or harassment must be for, or in connection with, demand for dowry.

When the above ingredients are established by reliable and acceptable evidence, such death shall be called dowry death and such husband or his relatives shall be deemed to have caused her death. If the above-mentioned ingredients are attracted in view of the special provision, the court shall presume and it shall record such fact as proved unless and until it is disproved by the accused. However, it is open to the accused to adduce such evidence for disproving such compulsory presumption as the burden is unmistakably on him to do so and he can discharge such burden by getting an answer through cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses or by adducing evidence on the defence side.

11. To attract the provisions of Section 304-B, one of the main ingredients of the offence which is required to be established is that "soon before her death" she was subjected to cruelty or harassment "for, or in connection with the demand for dowry". The expression "soon before her death" used in Section 304-B IPC and Section 113-B of the Evidence Act is present with the idea of proximity test. In fact, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that there is no proximity for the alleged demand of dowry and harassment. With regard to the said claim, we shall advert to the same while considering the evidence led in by the prosecution. Though the language used is "soon before her death", no definite period has been enacted and the expression "soon before her death" has not been defined in both the enactments. Accordingly, the determination of the period which can come within the term "soon before her death" is to be determined by the courts, depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case. However, the said expression would normally imply that the interval should not be much between the cruelty or harassment concerned and the death in question. In other words, there must be existence of a proximate and live link between the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and the death concerned. If the alleged incident of cruelty is remote in time and has become stale enough not to disturb the mental equilibrium of the woman concerned, it would be of no consequence. These principles have been reiterated in Kaliyaperumal v. State of T.N. and Yashoda v. State of M.P."

19. In the case of Ramesh Vithal Patil v. State of Karnataka [JT 2014 (8) SC 219 : 2014 (11) SCC 516] this Court held as follows:-

"20. Moreover, admittedly the deceased committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her marriage. Section 113-A of the Evidence Act is, therefore, clearly attracted to this case. Presumption contemplated therein must spring in action. This provision was introduced by the Criminal Law (Second Amendment) Act, 1983 to resolve the difficulty of proof where married women are forced to commit suicide but incriminating evidence is difficult to get as it is usually available within the four walls of the matrimonial home....."

20. With these principles in mind, let us analyse the evidence led in by the prosecution. The marriage of Kavita@Kusum (since deceased) was solemnized with Karamvir on 17.07.1994. Kavita died on 26.09.1996 after consuming some poisonous substance at her matrimonial home. The father of the deceased lodged a complaint against the accused persons that he had given dowry on the eve of marriage beyond his means but after 20-25 days of marriage, Karamvir-appellant No. 2 herein, Maya Devi-appellant No.1 herein and brothers Dharamveer and Paramveer and sister Sonika, started harassing his daughter for more money. When Kavita visited her father's house, she narrated the entire tale of woes to her parents and brother. When the complainant enquired about the matter, the appellants informed the complainant that the appellant No. 2 is in need of money and they also have to perform the marriage of Sonika. A sum of Rs. 20,000/- was paid to appellant No. 2 so that the daughter of the complainant is not harassed. It was further stated that the complainant received a letter of his daughter regarding continuous demand for dowry and sufferings meted out to her. The complainant paid a further sum of Rs. 25,000/- for the purchase of refrigerator and gold chain to the appellant No. 2. Kavita was sent with her husband on the assurance that the accused family would not harass her in future. Even on the day of 'sakrant', when the brother of the deceased visited her matrimonial home, the accused threatened them that the household articles of Kavita will be thrown out. A further demand of Rs.30,000/- was made to meet the kitchen expenses by the appellants. Since that demand was not fulfilled, the deceased was left with her father at Delhi. Subsequently, the complainant requested to compromise the matter and tendered his apology in writing. In June 1996, the deceased was brought to home by the accused persons. After some days, when the complainant visited her matrimonial home at Rohtak, he was informed that situation has not changed and whenever she brings money, the peace returns for 10-20 days otherwise she is beaten mercilessly by the accused persons. On 26.09.1996, the complainant got the information about the death of his daughter. The case was committed to the Court of Sessions and the accused were found guilty under Section 304B and 498A of the IPC. There is ample evidence that the deceased was harassed, maltreated and was subjected to cruelty, for and in connection with the demands for dowry by the accused. Admittedly, appellant No. 2 was present in his office on 26.09.1996 located at M.D. University Campus at Rohtak but he did not attend to his wife at the relevant time. The assertion made by learned senior counsel for the appellants that the deceased was suffering from moderate depressing episode and was having suicidal tendencies prior to her death is of no consequence. Dr. V.P. Mehla (DW-2) was apprised by the deceased about the harassment and the maltreatment by her in-laws a month prior to her death when she was taken to the aforesaid doctor for the alleged treatment. According to DW-2, the deceased was so much depressed as a result of the act of cruelty meted out to her at the hands of the appellants that she developed suicidal tendencies. The testimony of DW-2 shows that the accused had created such a charged environment in her matrimonial home that she developed suicidal tendencies. Except appellant No. 1 herein, all were living in the house at Rohtak. Appellant No. 1 herein was a frequent visitor to that house and she herself admitted this fact in her statement under Section 313 of the Code. Thus, it is very much clear that accused persons maltreated, harassed and subjected the deceased to cruelty, after the solemnization of her marriage with the appellant No.2 herein, during her life time and soon before her death, for and in connection with the demands for dowry, who died at her matrimonial home within seven years of her marriage otherwise than in normal circumstances.

21. Section 304B IPC does not categorise death as homicidal or suicidal or accidental. This is because death caused by burns can, in a given case, be homicidal or suicidal or accidental. Similarly, death caused by bodily injury can, in a given case, be homicidal or suicidal or accidental. Finally, any death occurring "otherwise than under normal circumstances" can, in a given case, be homicidal or suicidal or accidental. Therefore, if all the other ingredients of Section 304B IPC are fulfilled, any death (homicidal or suicidal or accidental) whether caused by burns or by bodily injury or occurring otherwise than under normal circumstances shall, as per the legislative mandate, be called a "dowry death" and the woman's husband or his relative "shall be deemed to have caused her death". The section clearly specifies what constitutes the offence of dowry death and also identifies the single offender or multiple offenders who has or have caused the dowry death.

22. The key words under Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1872 are "shall presume" leaving no option with a court but to presume an accused brought before it of causing a dowry death guilty of the offence. However, the redeeming factor of this provision is that the presumption is rebuttable. Section 113B of the Act enables an accused to prove his innocence and places a reverse onus of proof on him or her. In the case on hand, accused persons failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased died a natural death. When Kavita allegedly committed suicide, her husband-appellant No.2, though he was not present in the house, was present in his office at M.D. University, Rohtak at the relevant time but he did not make any sincere effort to take her to the hospital which was very near to the place of the incident. Similarly, appellant No. 2 got the deceased examined by DW-2 in order to create an impression that she was struggling with chronic depression but the truth floated upon the surface when the deceased reveals that the accused persons were maltreating her and she had started picking up the ideas of suicide. Lastly, appellant No. 2 falsely informed the court that having learnt about the death of his wife Kavita, he left for Delhi to inform her family members. In fact, the accused never went to Delhi and the complainant received a telephonic message from an unknown person regarding the death of his daughter. So far as Maya Devi- appellant No. 1 herein is concerned, there is no denying the fact that she was working as a teacher in a government school and she was not present at the relevant time at the place of incident but it is very much clear from the evidence on record that both the accused persons had a dominating role in the entire episode and she had always accompanied her son-appellant No. 2 herein to the house of the complainant (PW-3) for the dowry demands. The presumption under Section 113B of the Act is mandatory may be contrasted with Section 113A of the Act which was introduced contemporaneously. Section 113A of the Act, dealing with abetment of suicide, uses the expression "may presume". This being the position, a two-stage process is required to be followed in respect of an offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC: it is necessary to first ascertain whether the ingredients of the Section have been made out against the accused; if the ingredients are made out, then the accused is deemed to have caused the death of the woman but is entitled to rebut the statutory presumption of having caused a dowry death. From the evidence on record, we are of the opinion that in the present case Kavita died an unnatural death by committing suicide as she was subjected to cruelty/harassment by her husband and in-laws in connection with the demand for dowry which started from the time of her marriage and continued till she committed suicide. Thus, the provisions of Sections 304B and 498A of the IPC will be fully attracted.

Conclusion:

23. In the light of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that Kavita@Kusum suffered death at her matrimonial home, otherwise than under normal circumstances, within seven years of her marriage, and the case squarely falls within the ambit of dowry death. In the present case, from the evidence of the Doctor (DW-2), PW-3 and PW-4, we find that the harassment of the deceased was with a view to coerce her to convince her parents to meet the demands for dowry.

24. All the above factors clearly established the legal requirements for an offence falling under Sections 304B and 498A IPC with the aid of Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1872 against the appellants and the conviction and sentence imposed, therefore, do not call for interference. Hence, the appeal fails and is accordingly dismissed.

**********
CROSS CITATION
1997 AIR (SC) 3011
1997 (6) SCC 241
1997 (3) (Suppl) SCR 404
APPEARANCES
Mr. F.S. Nariman, Senior Advocate, Ms. Meenakshi Arora and Ms. Niti Dixit, Advocates with him for the Petitioners.
Mr. T.R. Andhyarujina, Solicitor General, Mr. Mukul Mudgal, Ms. Suvira Lal, Mr. C.V.S. Rao, Mr. K.S. Bhati and Mr. M.K. Singh, Advocates with him for the Respondents.

HEADNOTE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Articles 14, 19, 21, 15, 32, 141 - Gender Equality - Sexual harassment of working women at work places - Held violation of fundamental rights of women workers require for effective redressal that guidelines be laid down for protection of these rights to fill legislative vacuum - Right is also covered under Article 19(1)(g) to practice profession - In exercise of power under Article 32 guidelines are issued for enforcement of fundamental rights and these would be treated as the law declared by this Court under Article 141 of constitution and be observed at all work places for preservation and enforcement of the right to gender equality of working women and be binding on all employers who have to provide procedures for resolution, settlement or prosecution of acts of sexual harassment by taking all steps required - International law on the subject considered.

Sexual harassment
Sexual harassment defined in guidelines issued to be treated as law and would include unwelcome sexually determined behaviour - Prohibitions as per guidelines to be included under standing orders under Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act 1946 and for Govt in Conduct Rules - Complaints mechanism to be set up - Govt to consider adopting suitable legislation to ensure implementation of guidelines.
HELD
Each such incident results in violation of the fundamental rights of 'Gender Equality' and the 'Right to Life and Liberty'. It is a clear violation of the rights under Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution. One of the logical consequences of such an incident is also the violation of the victim's fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) 'to practice any profession or to carry out any occupation, trade or business'. Such violations, therefore, attract the remedy under Article 32 for the enforcement of these fundamental rights of women. This class action under Article 32 of the Constitution is for this reason. A writ of mandamus in such a situation, if it is to be effective, needs to be accompanied by directions for prevention; as the violation of fundamental rights of this kind is a recurring phenomenon. The fundamental right to carry on any occupation, trade or profession depends on the availability of a "safe" working environment. Right to life means life with dignity. The primary responsibility for ensuring such safety and dignity through suitable legislation, and the creation of a mechanism for its enforcement, is of the legislature and the executive. When, however, instances of sexual harassment resulting in violation of fundamental rights of women workers under Articles 14, 19 and 21 are brought before us for redress under Article 32, an effective redressal requires that some guidelines should be laid down for the protection of these rights to fill the legislative vacuum.

In the absence of domestic law occupying the field, to formulate effective measures to check the evil of sexual harassment of working women at all work places, the contents of International Conventions and norms are significant for the purpose of interpretation of the guarantee of gender equality, right to work with human dignity in Articles 14, 15, 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution and the safeguards against sexual harassment implicit therein. Any International Convention not inconsistent with the fundamental rights and in harmony with its spirit must be read into these provisions to enlarge the meaning and content thereof, to promote the object of the constitutional guarantee. This is implicit from Article 51(c) and the enabling power of the Parliament to enact laws for implementing the International Conventions and norms by virtue of Article 253 read with Entry 14 of the union List in Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Article 73 also is relevant. It provides that the executive power of the Union shall extend to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws. The executive power of the Union is, therefore, available till the Parliament enacts legislation to expressly provide measures needed to curb the evil.

The obligation of this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution for the enforcement of these fundamental rights in the absence of legislation must be viewed along with the role of judiciary envisaged in the Beijing Statement of Principles of the Independence of the Judiciary in the LAWASIA region. These principles were accepted by the Chief Justices of the Asia and the Pacific at Beijing in 1995 as those representing the minimum standards necessary to be observed in order to maintain the independence and effective functioning of the judiciary.

At the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, the Government of India has also made an official commitment, inter alia, to formulate and operationalize a national policy on women which will continuously guide and inform action at every level and in every sector; to set up a Commission for Women's Rights to act as a public defender of women's human rights; to institutionalise a national level mechanism to monitor the implementation of the Platform for Action. We have, therefore, no hesitation in placing reliance on the above for the purpose of construing the nature and ambit of constitutional guarantee of gender equality in our Constitution.

The meaning and content of the fundamental rights guaranteed in the Constitution of India are of sufficient amplitude to encompass all the facets of gender equality including prevention of sexual harassment or abuse. Independence of Judiciary forms a part of our constitutional scheme. The international conventions and norms are to be read into them in the absence of enacted domestic law occupying the field when there is no inconsistency between them. It is now an accepted rule of judicial construction that regard must be had to international conventions and norms for construing domestic law when there is no inconsistency between them and there is a void in the domestic law. The High Court of Australia in Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v. Teoh, 128 ALR 353, has recognised the concept of legitimate expectation of its observance in the absence of a contrary legislative provision, even in the absence of a Bill of Rights in the Constitution of Australia.

There is no reason why these international conventions and norms cannot, therefore, be used for construing the fundamental rights expressly guaranteed in the Constitution of India which embody the basic concept of gender equality in all spheres of human activity.

In view of the above, and the absence of enacted law to provide for the effective enforcement of the basic human right of gender equality and guarantee against sexual harassment and abuse, more particularly against sexual harassment at work places, we lay down the guidelines and norms specified hereinafter for due observance at all work places or other institutions, until a legislation is enacted for the purpose. This is done in exercise of the power available under Article 32 of the Constitution for enforcement of the fundamental rights and it is further emphasised that this would be treated as the law declared by this Court under Article 141 of the Constitution.

It shall be the duty of the employer or other responsible persons in work places or other institutions to prevent or deter the commission of acts of sexual harassment and to provide the procedures for the resolution, settlement or prosecution of acts of sexual harassment by taking all steps required.

All employers or persons in charge of work place whether in public or private sector should take appropriate steps to prevent sexual harassment. Without prejudice to the generality of this obligation they should take the following steps:

(a) Express prohibition of sexual harassment as defined above at the work place should be notified, published and circulated in appropriate ways.

(b) The Rules/Regulations of Government and Public Sector bodies relating to conduct and discipline should include rules/regulations prohibiting sexual harassment and provide for appropriate penalties in such rules against the offender.

(c) As regards private employers steps should be taken to include the aforesaid prohibitions in the standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946.

(d) Appropriate work conditions should be provided in respect of work, leisure, health and hygiene to further ensure that there is no hostile environment towards women at work places and no employee woman should have reasonable grounds to believe that she is disadvantaged in connection with her employment.

Accordingly, we direct that the above guidelines and norms would be strictly observed in all work places for the preservation and enforcement of the right to gender equality of the working women. These directions would be binding and enforceable in law until incomplete suitable legislation is enacted to occupy the field. [Para 3, 7, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 & 19]


J.S. VERMA, CJI.:

1. This Writ Petition has been filed for the enforcement of the fundamental rights of working women under Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India in view of the prevailing climate in which the violation of these rights is not uncommon. With the increasing awareness and emphasis on gender justice, there is increase in the effort to guard against such violations; and the resentment towards incidents of sexual harassment is also increasing. The present petition has been brought as a class action by certain social activists and NGOs with the aim of focussing attention towards this societal aberration, and assisting in finding suitable methods for realisation of the true concept of 'gender equality'; and to prevent sexual harassment of working women in all work places through judicial process, to fill the vacuum in existing legislation.

2. The immediate cause for the filing of this writ petition is an incident of alleged brutal gang rape of a social worker in a village of Rajasthan. That incident is the subject matter of a separate criminal action and no further mention of it, by us, is necessary. The incident reveals the hazards to which a working woman may be exposed and the depravity to which sexual harassment can degenerate; and the urgency for safeguards by an alternative mechanism in the absence of legislative measures. In the absence of legislative measures, the need is to find an effective alternative mechanism to fulfil this felt and urgent social need.

3. Each such incident results in violation of the fundamental rights of 'Gender Equality' and the 'Right to Life and Liberty'. It is a clear violation of the rights under Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution. One of the logical consequences of such an incident is also the violation of the victim's fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) 'to practice any profession or to carry out any occupation, trade or business'. Such violations, therefore, attract the remedy under Article 32 for the enforcement of these fundamental rights of women. This class action under Article 32 of the Constitution is for this reason. A writ of mandamus in such a situation, if it is to be effective, needs to be accompanied by directions for prevention; as the violation of fundamental rights of this kind is a recurring phenomenon. The fundamental right to carry on any occupation, trade or profession depends on the availability of a "safe" working environment. Right to life means life with dignity. The primary responsibility for ensuring such safety and dignity through suitable legislation, and the creation of a mechanism for its enforcement, is of the legislature and the executive. When, however, instances of sexual harassment resulting in violation of fundamental rights of women workers under Articles 14, 19 and 21 are brought before us for redress under Article 32, an effective redressal requires that some guidelines should be laid down for the protection of these rights to fill the legislative vacuum.

4. The notice of the petition was given to the State of Rajasthan and the Union of India. The learned Solicitor General appeared for the Union of India and rendered valuable assistance in the true spirit of a Law Officer to help us find a proper solution to this social problem of considerable magnitude. In addition to Ms. Meenakshi Arora and Ms. Naina Kapur who assisted the Court with full commitment, Shri Fali S. Nariman appeared as Amicus Curiae and rendered great assistance. We place on record our great appreciation for every counsel who appeared in the case and rendered the needed assistance to the Court which has enabled us to deal with this unusual matter in the manner considered appropriate for a cause of this nature.

5. Apart from Article 32 of the Constitution of India, we may refer to some other provisions which envisage judicial intervention for eradication of this social evil. Some provisions in the Constitution in addition to Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21, which have relevance are :

Article 15 :

"15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste sex or place of birth.

(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.

(2) xxx xxx xxx

(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children.

(4) xxx xxx xxx

Article 42 :

"42. Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief - The State shall make provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief."

Article 51A :

51A. Fundamental duties. - It shall be the duty of every citizen of India.-

(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, ....

xxx xxx xxx

(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities, to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;

xxx xxx xxx

6. Before we refer to the international conventions and norms having relevance in this field and the manner in which they assume significance in application and judicial interpretation, we may advert to some other provisions in the Constitution which permit such use. These provisions are :

Article 51 :

"51. Promotion of international peace and security - The State shall endeavour to -

xxx xxx xxx

(c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised people with one another; and

xxx xxx xxx

Article 253 :

"253. Legislation for giving effect to international agreements - Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or any decision made at any international conference, association or other body."

Seventh Schedule :

"List I - Union List :

xxx xxx xxx

14. Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and implementing of treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign countries.

7. In the absence of domestic law occupying the field, to formulate effective measures to check the evil of sexual harassment of working women at all work places, the contents of International Conventions and norms are significant for the purpose of interpretation of the guarantee of gender equality, right to work with human dignity in Articles 14, 15, 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution and the safeguards against sexual harassment implicit therein. Any International Convention not inconsistent with the fundamental rights and in harmony with its spirit must be read into these provisions to enlarge the meaning and content thereof, to promote the object of the constitutional guarantee. This is implicit from Article 51(c) and the enabling power of the Parliament to enact laws for implementing the International Conventions and norms by virtue of Article 253 read with Entry 14 of the union List in Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Article 73 also is relevant. It provides that the executive power of the Union shall extend to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws. The executive power of the Union is, therefore, available till the Parliament enacts legislation to expressly provide measures needed to curb the evil.

8. Thus, the power of this Court under Article 32 for enforcement of the fundamental rights and the executive power of the Union have to meet the challenge to protect the working women from sexual harassment and to make their fundamental rights meaningful. Governance of the society by the rule of law mandates this requirement as a logical concomitant of the constitutional scheme. The exercise performed by the Court in this matter is with this common perception shared with the learned Solicitor General and other members of the Bar who rendered valuable assistance in the performance of this difficult task in public interest.

9. The progress made at each hearing culminated in the formulation of guidelines to which the Union of India gave its consent through the learned Solicitor General, indicating that these should be the guidelines and norms declared by this Court to govern the behaviour of the employers and all others at the work places curb this social evil.

10. Gender equality includes protection from sexual harassment and right to work with dignity, which is an universally recognised basic human right. The common minimum requirement of this right has received global acceptance. The International Conventions and norms are, therefore, of great significance in the formulation of the guidelines to achieve this purpose.

11. The obligation of this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution for the enforcement of these fundamental rights in the absence of legislation must be viewed along with the role of judiciary envisaged in the Beijing Statement of Principles of the Independence of the Judiciary in the LAWASIA region. These principles were accepted by the Chief Justices of the Asia and the Pacific at Beijing in 1995 as those representing the minimum standards necessary to be observed in order to maintain the independence and effective functioning of the judiciary. The objectives of the judiciary mentioned in the Beijing Statement are:

"Objectives of the Judiciary:

10. The objectives and functions of the Judiciary include the following :

(a) to ensure that all persons are able to live securely under the Rule of Law;

(b) to promote, within the proper limits of the judicial function, the observance and the attainment of human rights; and

(c) to administer the law impartially among persons and between persons and the State."

12. Some provisions in the 'Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women', of significance in the present context are :

Article 11 :

"1. States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in the field of employment in order to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women, the same rights, in particular :

(a) The right to work as an inalienable right of all human beings;

xxx xxx xxx

(f) The right to protection of health and to safety in working conditions, including the safeguarding of the function of reproduction.

xxx xxx xxx

Article 24 :

"States Parties undertake to adopt all necessary measures at the national level aimed at achieving the full realization of the rights recognised in the present Convention."

13. The general recommendations of CEDAW in this context in respect of Article 11 are :

"Violence and equality in employment :

22. Equality in employment can be seriously impaired when women are subjected to gender specific violence, such as sexual harassment in the work place.

23. Sexual harassment includes such unwelcome sexually determined behaviour as physical contacts and advances, sexually coloured remarks, showing pornography and sexual demands, whether by words or actions. Such conduct can be humiliating and may constitute a health and safety problem; it is discriminatory when the woman has reasonable grounds to believe that her objection would disadvantage her in connection with her employment, including recruiting or promotion, or when it creates a hostile working environment. Effective complaints procedures and remedies, including compensation should be provided.

24. States should include in their reports information about sexual harassment, and on measures to protect women from sexual harassment and other forms of violence of coercion in the work place."

14. The Government of India has ratified the above Resolution on June 25, 1993 with some reservations which are not material in the present context. At the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, the Government of India has also made an official commitment, inter alia, to formulate and operationalize a national policy on women which will continuously guide and inform action at every level and in every sector; to set up a Commission for Women's Rights to act as a public defender of women's human rights; to institutionalise a national level mechanism to monitor the implementation of the Platform for Action. We have, therefore, no hesitation in placing reliance on the above for the purpose of construing the nature and ambit of constitutional guarantee of gender equality in our Constitution.

15. The meaning and content of the fundamental rights guaranteed in the Constitution of India are of sufficient amplitude to encompass all the facets of gender equality including prevention of sexual harassment or abuse. Independence of Judiciary forms a part of our constitutional scheme. The international conventions and norms are to be read into them in the absence of enacted domestic law occupying the field when there is no inconsistency between them. It is now an accepted rule of judicial construction that regard must be had to international conventions and norms for construing domestic law when there is no inconsistency between them and there is a void in the domestic law. The High Court of Australia in Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v. Teoh, 128 ALR 353, has recognised the concept of legitimate expectation of its observance in the absence of a contrary legislative provision, even in the absence of a Bill of Rights in the Constitution of Australia.

16. In Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa, 1993(2) SCC 746, a provision in the ICCPR was referred to support the view taken that an enforceable right to compensation is not alien to the concept of enforcement of a guaranteed right', as a public law remedy under Article 32, distinct from the private law remedy in torts. There is no reason why these international conventions and norms cannot, therefore, be used for construing the fundamental rights expressly guaranteed in the Constitution of India which embody the basic concept of gender equality in all spheres of human activity.

17. In view of the above, and the absence of enacted law to provide for the effective enforcement of the basic human right of gender equality and guarantee against sexual harassment and abuse, more particularly against sexual harassment at work places, we lay down the guidelines and norms specified hereinafter for due observance at all work places or other institutions, until a legislation is enacted for the purpose. This is done in exercise of the power available under Article 32 of the Constitution for enforcement of the fundamental rights and it is further emphasised that this would be treated as the law declared by this Court under Article 141 of the Constitution.

18. The GUIDELINES and NORMS prescribed herein are as under :-

HAVING REGARD to the definition of 'human rights' in Section 2(d) of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, TAKING NOTE of the fact that the present civil and penal laws in India do not adequately provide for specific protection of women from sexual harassment in work places and that enactment of such legislation will take considerable time,

It is necessary and expedient for employers in work places as well as other responsible persons or institutions to observe certain guidelines to ensure the prevention of sexual harassment of women:

1. Duty of the Employer or other responsible persons in work places and other institutions:

It shall be the duty of the employer or other responsible persons in work places or other institutions to prevent or deter the commission of acts of sexual harassment and to provide the procedures for the resolution, settlement or prosecution of acts of sexual harassment by taking all steps required.

2. Definition:

For this purpose, sexual harassment includes such unwelcome sexually determined behaviour (whether directly or by implication) as :

a) Physical contact and advances;

b) a demand or request for sexual favours;

c) sexually coloured remarks;

d) showing pornography;

e) any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct

of sexual nature.

Where any of these acts is committed in circumstances where- under the victim of such conduct has a reasonable apprehension that in relation to the victim's employment or work whether she is drawing salary, or honorarium or voluntary, whether in government, public or private enterprise such conduct can be humiliating and may constitute a health and safety problem. It is discriminatory for instance when the woman has reasonable grounds to believe that her objection would disadvantage her in connection with her employment or work including recruiting or promotion or when it creates a hostile work environment. Adverse consequences might be visited if the victim does not consent to the conduct in question or raises any objection thereto.

3. Preventive Steps:

All employers or persons in charge of work place whether in public or private sector should take appropriate steps to prevent sexual harassment. Without prejudice to the generality of this obligation they should take the following steps:

(a) Express prohibition of sexual harassment as defined above at the work place should be notified, published and circulated in appropriate ways.

(b) The Rules/Regulations of Government and Public Sector bodies relating to conduct and discipline should include rules/regulations prohibiting sexual harassment and provide for appropriate penalties in such rules against the offender.

(c) As regards private employers steps should be taken to include the aforesaid prohibitions in the standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946.

(d) Appropriate work conditions should be provided in respect of work, leisure, health and hygiene to further ensure that there is no hostile environment towards women at work places and no employee woman should have reasonable grounds to believe that she is disadvantaged in connection with her employment.

4. Criminal Proceedings:

Where such conduct amounts to a specific offence under the Indian Penal Code or under any other law, the employer shall initiate appropriate action in accordance with law by making a complaint with the appropriate authority.

In particular, it should ensure that victims, or witnesses are not victimized or discriminated against while dealing with complaints of sexual harassment. The victims of sexual harassment should have the option to seek transfer of the perpetrator or their own transfer.

5. Disciplinary Action:

Where such conduct amounts to mis-conduct in employment as defined by the relevant service rules, appropriate disciplinary action should be initiated by the employer in accordance with those rules.

6. Complaint Mechanism:

Whether or not such conduct constitutes an offence under law or a breach of the service rules, an appropriate complaint mechanism should be created in the employer's organization for redress of the complaint made by the victim. Such complaint mechanism should ensure time bound treatment of complaints.

7. Complaints Committee:

The complaint mechanism, referred to in (6) above, should be adequate to provide, where necessary, a Complaints Committee, a special counsellor or other support service, including the maintenance of confidentiality.

The Complaints Committee should be headed by a woman and not less than half of its member should be women. Further, to prevent the possibility of any undue pressure or influence from senior levels, such Complaints Committee should involve a third party, either NGO or other body who is familiar with the issue of sexual harassment.

The Complaints Committee must make an annual report to the Government department concerned of the complaints and action taken by them.

The employers and person in charge will also report on the compliance with the aforesaid guidelines including on the reports of the Complaints Committee to the Government department.

8. Workers' Initiative:

Employees should be allowed to raise issues of sexual harassment at workers' meeting and in other appropriate forum and it should be affirmatively discussed in Employer-Employee Meetings.

9. Awareness:

Awareness of the rights of female employees in this regard should be created in particular by prominently notifying the guidelines (and appropriate legislation when enacted on the subject) in a suitable manner.

10. Third Party Harassment:

Where sexual harassment occurs as a result of an act or omission by any third party or outsider, the employer and person in charge will take all steps necessary and reasonable to assist the affected person in terms of support and preventive action.

11. The Central/State Governments are requested to consider adopting suitable measures including legislation to ensure that the guidelines laid down by this order are also observed by the employers in Private Sector.

12. These guidelines will not prejudice any rights available under the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.

19. Accordingly, we direct that the above guidelines and norms would be strictly observed in all work places for the preservation and enforcement of the right to gender equality of the working women. These directions would be binding and enforceable in law until incomplete suitable legislation is enacted to occupy the field. These writ petitions are disposed of accordingly.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Evidence Act, 1872
Section 113B [As inserted by Dowry Prohibition (Amendment Act, 43 of 1986] - Indian Penal Code, 1860 - Section 304B- Presumption under - Nature of Presumption - Essentials for raising presumptions - Expression, "soon before death" - Import mentioned.
HELD
Presumption under section 113B is a presumption of law. On proof of the essentials mentioned therein, it becomes obligatory on the court to raise a presumption that the accused caused the dowry death. The presumption shall be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(1) The question before the court must be whether the accused has committed the dowry death of a woman. (This means that the presumption can be raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence under section 304B IPC).

(2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with any demand for dowry.

(4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death. (Para 10)

The expression 'soon before' is very relevant where section 113B of the Evidence Act and section 304B IPC are pressed into service. Prosecution is obliged to show that soon before the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and only in that case presumption operates. Evidence in that regard has to be led by prosecution. 'Soon before' is a relative term and it would depend upon circumstances of each case and no straitjacket formula can be laid down as to what would constitute a period of soon before the occurrence. It would be hazardous to indicate any fixed period, and that brings in the importance of a proximity test both for the proof of an offence of dowry death as well as for raising a presumption under section 113B of the Evidence Act. The expression 'soon before' would normally imply that the interval should not be much between the concerned cruelty or harassment and the death in question. There must be existence of a proximate and live-link between the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and the concerned death. (Para 11)


ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1. Menace of dowry cuts across caste, religion and geographical location. In the instant case, victim belonged to a remote village in the State of Kerala. The two appellants stood charged for alleged commission of offence punishable under section 304B read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short 'the IPC'). The trial court found that the prosecution has failed to establish the accusations and directed their acquittal.

2. In appeal preferred by the State, the judgment of acquittal was set aside and the accused persons were found guilty under section 304B read with section 34 IPC and each was sentenced to undergo RI for seven years.

3. The victim in this case was one Sherifa (hereinafter referred to as 'the deceased') and the accused-appellants 1 and 2 were her husband and mother-in-law respectively.

4. According to the prosecution following is the factual scenario:

The deceased was married to the appellant no.1 (A-1) on 19.1.1989. At the time of marriage, there was an agreement to pay Rs.35000/- as dowry. Since the entire amount was not paid, the accused was subjected to mental and physical harassment. On 29.8.1991 about 9.00 a.m. she committed suicide by jumping into a well. Information was lodged by Kunhimoidi (PW-1), a neighbour and investigation was undertaken. The case was registered under the heading 'unnatural death'. On completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed. Seventeen witnesses were examined to further the prosecution version, while the accused persons pleaded innocence and examined 3 witnesses. According to them, the deceased had accidentally fallen into the well and it was not a case of suicide. As noted above, the trial court found that there were some unexplained discrepancies in the evidence of the main witnesses i.e PWs 5, 6 and 15 relating to demand of dowry and, therefore, it would be unsafe to convict accused persons.

5. In appeal, the High Court found that the approach of the trial court was not correct. It found that the evidence of PWs 6 and 15 clearly established the commission of offence by the accused persons.

6. In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the accused-appellants submitted that there was no dispute regarding payment of a sum of Rs.30,000/- as dowry. In fact, this amount was kept in a bank account in the name of the deceased and this itself negates the plea of prosecution that there was greed for money. Further, the deceased had herself withdrawn money and given the same to somebody. The claim of Kunhammed and Kunhi Choyi (PWs 6 and 15 respectively) that they witnessed the occurrence is improbabilised by the evidence of Prema (PW-5) who was stated to be an eyewitness. Her evidence rules out theory of suicide and the possibility of PWs 6 and 15 seeing the alleged occurrence. The well admittedly was not covered on the sides and it was possible as was held by the trial court that the deceased had slipped. Since the view taken by the sessions judge was a possible view, the High Court should not have interfered with the same. Furthermore, the evidence of prosecution in no way shows that the accused no.2 allegedly demanded dowry. Moideen (PW-8) had himself stated that he did not have any idea if any amount in excess of Rs.30,000/- was demanded as dowry. There was no harassment after the payment of Rs.30,000/-. Therefore, there was no question of any demand immediately prior to the alleged occurrence. Section 304B has therefore no application.

7. In response, learned counsel for the State of Kerala submitted that both the trial court and the High Court have discarded the plea taken by the accused persons that the deceased accidentally fell into the well. The trial court proceeded on erroneous premises to hold that the demand of dowry has not been established overlooking the cogent evidence of Moideen and Kunhammed (PWs 8 and 12 respectively). Moreover, PWs 3 and 4 who were neighbours categorically stated about the harassment meted out to the deceased for non-payment of dowry.

8. Section 304B IPC deals with dowry death which reads as follows:

"304B. Dowry Death- (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily
injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with any
demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death" and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.

Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section "dowry" shall have same meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."

9. The provision has application when death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relatives of her husband for, or in connection with any demand for dowry. In order to attract application of section 304B IPC, the essential ingredients are as follows:-

(i) The death of a woman should be caused by burns or bodily injury or otherwise than under a normal circumstance.

(ii) Such a death should have occurred within seven years of her marriage.

(iii) She must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband.

(iv) Such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with demand of dowry.

(v) Such cruelty or harassment is shown to have been meted out to the woman soon before her death.

10. Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in short the 'Evidence Act') is also relevant for the case at hand. Both section 304B IPC and section 113B of the Evidence Act were inserted by the Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act 43 of 1986 with a view to combat the increasing menace of dowry deaths. Section 113B reads as follows:-

"113B: Presumption as to dowry death- When the question is whether a person has
committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such
woman has been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Explanation - For the purposes of this section "dowry death" shall have the same meaning as in section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

The necessity for insertion of the two provisions has been amply analysed by the Law Commission of India in its 21st Report dated 10th August, 1988 on 'Dowry Deaths and Law Reform'. Keeping in view the impediment in the pre-existing law in securing evidence to prove dowry related deaths, legislature thought it wise to insert a provision relating to presumption of dowry death on proof of certain essentials. It is in this background presumptive section 113B in the Evidence Act has been inserted. As per the definition of 'dowry death' in section 304B IPC and the wording in the presumptive section 113B of the Evidence Act, one of the essential ingredients, amongst others, in both the provisions is that the concerned woman must have been "soon before her death" subjected to cruelty or harassment "for or in connection with the demand of dowry". Presumption under section 113B is a presumption of law. On proof of the essentials mentioned therein, it becomes obligatory on the court to raise a presumption that the accused caused the dowry death. The presumption shall be raised only on proof of the following essentials:

(1) The question before the court must be whether the accused has committed the dowry death of a woman. (This means that the presumption can be raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence under section 304B IPC).

(2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.

(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with any demand for dowry.

(4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death.

11. A conjoint reading of section 113B of the Evidence Act and section 304B IPC shows that there must be material to show that soon before her death the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment. Prosecution has to rule out the possibility of a natural or accidental death so as to bring it within the purview of the 'death occurring otherwise than in normal circumstances'. The expression 'soon before' is very relevant where section 113B of the Evidence Act and section 304B IPC are pressed into service. Prosecution is obliged to show that soon before the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and only in that case presumption operates. Evidence in that regard has to be led by prosecution. 'Soon before' is a relative term and it would depend upon circumstances of each case and no straitjacket formula can be laid down as to what would constitute a period of soon before the occurrence. It would be hazardous to indicate any fixed period, and that brings in the importance of a proximity test both for the proof of an offence of dowry death as well as for raising a presumption under section 113B of the Evidence Act. The expression 'soon before her death' used in the substantive section 304B IPC and section 113B of the Evidence Act is present with the idea of proximity test. No definite period has been indicated and the expression 'soon before' is not defined. A reference to expression 'soon before' used in section 114. Illustration (a) of the Evidence Act is relevant. It lays down that a court may presume that a man who is in the possession of goods 'soon after the theft', is either the thief, or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for its possession. The determination of the period which can come within the term 'soon before' is left to be determined by the courts, depending upon facts and circumstances of each case. Suffice, however, to indicate that the expression 'soon before' would normally imply that the interval should not be much between the concerned cruelty or harassment and the death in question. There must be existence of a proximate and live-link between the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and the concerned death. If alleged incident of cruelty is remote in time and has become stale enough not to disturb mental equilibrium of the woman concerned, it would be of no consequence.

12. When the aforesaid factual scenario as described by Narayani (PW 3), Safiya (PW-4), and PWs 8 and 12 is considered in the background of legal principles set out above, the inevitable conclusion is that accusations have been clearly established so far as accused-appellant no.1 husband of the deceased is concerned. But in respect of accused-appellant no.2, evidence against her relating to alleged demand of dowry is not cogent, and no credible evidence has been brought on record to substantiate the accusations. Therefore, while upholding the conviction and sentence imposed so far accused-appellant no.1 is concerned, we direct acquittal of accused-appellant no.2.

13. The accused-appellant no.1 is directed to surrender to custody to serve remainder of sentence, if any. The bail bonds of accused-appellant no.2 be cancelled.

14. The appeal is accordingly disposed of.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2010 (9) SCC 73
2010 (7) SCR 104
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Sections 498A and 304B - Evidence Act, 1872, Section 113B - Dowry death - Conviction - Bald statements by PWs.1 and 3 alleging that victim was subjected to cruelty and harassment just prior to her death - No evidence to show that the victim committed suicide due to cruelty and harassment - No charges framed under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961- Evidence produced related to demand for a fan only. Held, prosecution failed to fully satisfy the requirements of both Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1872 and Section 304B IPC. In view of insufficient evidence, appellant is given benefit of doubt. Conviction set aside.
HELD
Having carefully considered the submissions made on behalf of the respective parties, we are inclined to allow the benefit of doubt to the Appellants having particular regard to the fact that except for certain bald statements made by PWs.1 and 3 alleging that the victim had been subjected to cruelty and harassment prior to her death, there is no other evidence to prove that the victim committed suicide on account of cruelty and harassment to which she was subjected just prior to her death, which, in fact, are the ingredients of the evidence to be led in respect of Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, in order to bring home the guilt against an accused under Section 304B IPC.

No charges were framed against the Appellants under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 and the evidence led in order to prove the same for the purposes of Section 304B IPC was related to a demand for a fan only. (Para 16)

In order to bring home a conviction under Section 304B IPC, it will not be sufficient to only lead evidence showing that cruelty or harassment had been meted out to the victim, but that such treatment was in connection with the demand for dowry. Prosecution in this case has failed to fully satisfy the requirements of both Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1872 and Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code. (Para 17)

No case can be made out on the ground of insufficient evidence against the Appellants for conviction under Sections 498A and 304B IPC. (Para 18)

CASES REFERRED
1.Anand Kumar v. State of M.P. [JT 2009 (2) SC 662] (Para 12)

2.Biswajit Halder @ Babu Halder & Ors. v. State of W.B. [JT 2007 (5) SC 360] (Para 7)

3.Shri Gopal & Anr. v. Subhash & Ors. [JT 2004 (2) SC 158] (Para 8)

ALTAMAS KABIR, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 28th April, 2009, passed by Jabalpur Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court, dismissing Criminal Appeal No.103 of 2000, which had been directed against the judgment of conviction and sentence under Section 498A and Section 304B Indian Penal Code. By the said judgment, the learned Sessions Judge had sentenced the Appellants to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 months under Section 498A IPC and to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- and in default of payment of such fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further period of 3 years. Upon consideration of the materials on record, the High Court was of the view that the prosecution had proved its case beyond all reasonable doubts and that the appeal, therefore, deserved to be dismissed.

3. Appearing in support of the appeal, Mr. R.P. Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, contended that both the Courts below had erred in convicting the Appellants on the basis of evidence on record. Mr. Gupta submitted that in the absence of any evidence to prove the charges under Sections 304B and 498A IPC, the trial Court, as also the High Court, had erred in merely relying on the presumption available under Section 304B regarding the death of a woman by any burn or bodily injury or otherwise than under normal circumstances, within 7 years of her marriage, in coming to a conclusion that there would be a natural inference in such circumstance under Section 113A and 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, that the accused persons had caused the death of Kripa Bai by torturing her physically and mentally so as to drive the deceased to commit suicide. Mr. Gupta submitted that both the Courts below appear to have overlooked the fact that in order to prove a case of dowry death it would have to be shown that in addition to the fact that the death took place otherwise than in normal circumstances within 7 years of marriage, that soon before her death, the wife was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry. It was pointed out by Mr. Gupta that in the explanation to Sub-Section (1) of Section 304B it had been mentioned that for the purpose of the said Sub-Section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as under Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.

4. Mr. Gupta also submitted that the provisions of Section 113A of the Indian Evidence Act were not applicable in this case since no case for abetment of suicide by the husband or any of the husband's relatives had been alleged. On the other hand, the case sought to be made out is one under Section 113B relating to presumption as to dowry death. Mr. Gupta submitted that the provisions in Section 113B relating to presumption as to dowry death are similar to that of Section 304B IPC. He urged that in order to arrive at the presumption of dowry death, it would have to be shown by the prosecution that soon before her death, such woman had been subjected to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, which would lead to a presumption that such person caused the dowry death.

5. Mr. Gupta submitted that in the instant case, the Appellants had not been convicted under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, but under Section 304B and 498A IPC. Mr. Gupta submitted that the prosecution had not established that prior to the death of the victim Kripa Bai, she had been either subjected to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, particularly, when the Appellants had not been convicted under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.

6. It was pointed out that the only evidence on which reliance had been placed both by the trial Court, as well as the High Court, for convicting the Appellants, was the evidence of Vimla Bai, PW.1, the mother of the deceased and Radheshyam, PW.3, the brother of the deceased. In fact, the prosecution story was that since no dowry had been received from the family of the victim, she had been beaten and treated with cruelty. There is no other evidence regarding the physical and mental torture which the deceased was alleged to have been subjected to. Mr. Gupta urged that the marriage of the Appellant No.1 with the deceased was performed as part of a community marriage being celebrated on account of the poverty of couples who could not otherwise meet the expenses of marriage and that even the few utensils which were given at the time of such community marriage were given by the persons who had organized such marriages.

7. Mr. Gupta submitted that the evidence in this case was wholly insufficient to even suggest that the victim had been subjected to cruelty or harassment which was sufficient to compel her to commit suicide. In support of his submissions, Mr. Gupta firstly referred to the decision of this Court in Biswajit Halder @ Babu Halder & Ors. v. State of W.B. [JT 2007 (5) SC 360 : 2008 (1) SCC 202], wherein, in facts which were very similar, it was held that there was practically no evidence to show that there was any cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, the demands of dowry. There was also no finding in that regard. It was further observed that this deficiency in evidence proved fatal for the prosecution case and even otherwise mere evidence of cruelty and harassment was not sufficient to attract Section 304B IPC. It had to be shown in addition to that such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with, demand of dowry. Mr. Gupta urged that since the Appellants had not been convicted under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, the charge under Section 304B would also fail since the same was linked with the question of cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, the demand for dowry.

8. Mr. Gupta then urged that even the evidence of PW.3, Radheshyam, and also that of PW.2, Ashok Kumar, were full of omissions as to their statements before the police authorities and their evidence during the trial. Mr. Gupta submitted that such omissions were also fatal to the prosecution case since the same was mere embellishment and improvement of the evidence led by the prosecution. In this regard, Mr. Gupta referred to the decision of this Court in Shri Gopal & Anr. v. Subhash & Ors. [JT 2004 (2) SC 158 : 2004 (13) SCC 174]. In the said decision, while dealing with statements made by prosecution witnesses under Section 162 CrPC and omissions made during their evidence in Courts, this Court held that the same would amount to contradiction and their evidence on such point would not, therefore, be acceptable.

9. Mr. Gupta urged that both the trial Court, as well as the High Court, did not take into consideration any of the aforesaid matters while convicting the Appellants under Sections 304B and 498A IPC. Mr. Gupta urged that in such circumstances, the judgment and order of the trial Court, as well as that of the High Court, affirming the said judgment, are liable to be set aside.

10. Opposing the submissions made by Mr. R.P. Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned Advocate appearing for the State of Madhya Pradesh, submitted that the trial Court had considered the evidence of Vimla Bai, PW.1, the mother of the deceased and Radheshyam, PW.3, the brother of the deceased, in coming to a finding that their evidence was sufficient to bring home the guilt of the Appellants under Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC.

11. Ms. Makhija also reiterated the submissions which had been made before the trial Court regarding the presumption that was to be drawn both under Section 304B IPC, as also under Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, having regard to the fact that Kripa Bai had committed suicide within 7 years of her marriage. Ms. Makhija submitted that once it was found that by their actions the Appellants had driven Kripa Bai to commit suicide, the provisions of Section 304B IPC were immediately attracted and the Appellants, therefore, had been rightly convicted by the trial Court under Sections 498A and 304B IPC. Ms. Makhija urged that the evidence of PWs.1 and 3 were sufficient to meet the requirements of both Sections 113B of the Indian Evidence Act and Section 304B IPC.

12. Ms. Makhija then contended that as had been laid down by this Court in the case of Anand Kumar v. State of M.P. [JT 2009 (2) SC 662 : 2009 (3) SCC 799], in order to counter the presumption available under Section 113B, which is relatable to Section 304B, a heavy burden has been shifted on to the accused to prove his innocence. Having regard to the language of Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, which indicates that when a question arises as to whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by such other person or in connection with any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused such dowry death. Ms. Makhija urged that the aforesaid wording of Section 113B of Evidence Act and the use of the expression "shall" would clearly indicate that the Court shall presume such death as dowry death provided the conditions in Section 113B were satisfied and it would then be for the accused to prove otherwise.

13. Ms. Makhija, thereupon, urged that the order of conviction passed by the trial Court holding the Appellants guilty under Sections 498A and 304B IPC, confirmed by the High Court, did not warrant any interference by this Court.

14. Having carefully considered the submissions made on behalf of the respective parties, we are inclined to allow the benefit of doubt to the Appellants having particular regard to the fact that except for certain bald statements made by PWs.1 and 3 alleging that the victim had been subjected to cruelty and harassment prior to her death, there is no other evidence to prove that the victim committed suicide on account of cruelty and harassment to which she was subjected just prior to her death, which, in fact, are the ingredients of the evidence to be led in respect of Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, in order to bring home the guilt against an accused under Section 304B IPC.

15. As has been mentioned hereinbefore, in order to hold an accused guilty of an offence under Section 304-B IPC, it has to be shown that apart from the fact that the woman died on account of burn or bodily injury, otherwise than under normal circumstances, within 7 years of her marriage, it has also to be shown that soon before her death, she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry. Only then would such death be called "dowry death" and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused the death of the woman concerned.

16. In this case, one other aspect has to be kept in mind, namely, that no charges were framed against the Appellants under the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 and the evidence led in order to prove the same for the purposes of Section 304B IPC was related to a demand for a fan only.

17. The decision cited by Mr. R.P. Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, in Biswajit Halder's case (supra) was rendered in almost similar circumstances. In order to bring home a conviction under Section 304B IPC, it will not be sufficient to only lead evidence showing that cruelty or harassment had been meted out to the victim, but that such treatment was in connection with the demand for dowry. In our view, the prosecution in this case has failed to fully satisfy the requirements of both Section 113B of the Evidence Act, 1872 and Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code.

18. Accordingly, we are unable to agree with the views expressed both by the trial Court, as well as the High Court, and we are of the view that no case can be made out on the ground of insufficient evidence against the Appellants for conviction under Sections 498A and 304B IPC. The decision cited by Ms. Makhija in Anand Kumar's case (supra) deals with the proposition of shifting of onus of the burden of proof relating to the presumption which the Court is to draw under Section 113B of the Evidence Act and does not help the case of the State in a situation where there is no material to presume that an offence under Section 304B IPC had been committed.

19. In that view of the matter, we allow the Appeal and set aside the judgment of the trial Court convicting and sentencing the Appellants of offences alleged to have been committed under Sections 498A and 304B IPC. The judgment of the High Court impugned in the instant Appeal is also set aside. In the event, the Appellants are on bail, they shall be discharged from their bail bonds, and, in the event they are in custody, they should be released forthwith.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Indian Penal Code, 1860
Sections 498A, 304B - Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 3 - Dowry death - Evidence - Sufficiency - Sisters-in law - Both aged 18 and 16 years at the time of incident - Alleged to have harassed deceased for not bringing car and to have beaten with their brother, the husband of deceased - Evidence of informant general in nature - Mother and father also involved, but acquitted by High Court - No particulars of time and date of harassment by sisters - Not party to any demand - Evidence showing some harassment for lack of dowry about 2 and 1/2 years prior to death. Held that there was no sufficient ground to hold the sisters-in-law guilty for the offences charged as the allegations are not proximate to the death.
HELD
The complainant states that these appellants along with their brother used to harass Baljit Kaur for not bringing sufficient dowry and a Maruti car. In that process they used to beat the deceased. It is rather difficult to believe that these two young girls would go to the extent of beating the deceased merely based on a statement made by the brother of the deceased that too after the incident of his sister committing suicide without his evidence being corroborated in material particulars. (Para 6)

Neither PW-6 nor PW-7 or for that matter the complaint does give the particulars of the time and date when the alleged harassment was meted out by the appellants. As noticed by us hereinabove, these statements are omnibus in nature. The specific allegations of harassment made only involves A-1 and his father with whose case we are not concerned now. The appellants are neither parties to the demand for a buffalo or Rs.25,000 which seems to be the proximate cause of Baljit Kaur committing suicide. If at all the prosecution case against these appellants is to be accepted it would only show that soon after the marriage i.e. about 2 years prior to the death of the deceased, there was some alleged harassment for lack of dowry which, is not a sufficient ground to hold the appellants guilty for the offence charged, since these allegations are not proximate to the death of the deceased. (Para 7)


SANTOSH HEGDE, J.

1. Two appellants and 3 others were charged before the additional sessions judge, Kurukshetra for offence punishable under section 304B read with section 34 IPC in connection with the suicide of one Baljit Kaur who was married to the first accused Surinder Kumar about 2 years prior to her death on 28.1.1992. It was the prosecution case that because of the harassment meted out to said Baljit Kaur, she consumed poison on the intervening night of 27th and 28th January, 1992 and died at about 4 a.m. in Ismailpur village within the jurisdiction of
Police Station Thaska Miranji in Kurukshetra district. The information of death of Baljit Kaur was conveyed to her family on the said morning by one Dewa (not examined). On receipt of the said information, her family members including her brother Hari Chand PW-6 went to the village where Baljit Kaur's in-laws were residing and PW-6 having come to the conclusion that his sister had died under suspicious circumstances, lodged
a complaint with Thaska Miranji P.S. on 28.1.1992 at about 12.40 p.m. The initial investigation in regard to the death of Baljit Kaur was conducted by PW-10 which was later completed by Sub-Inspector of Police who was examined as
PW-9 who submitted the chargesheet for the offence stated hereinabove and after trial the sessions court came to the conclusion that the prosecution has established its case as against all the accused and it awarded 10 years' RI to A-2
Basawa Singh who was the father-in-law of the deceased, while A-3 Shanti Devi, mother-in-law, was awarded 8 years' RI and A-4 Surinder Kaur and A-5 Rajvinder Kaur were awarded 7 years' RI each all under section 304B IPC while A-1 Surinder Kumar, the husband of the deceased was awarded life imprisonment under section 304B IPC.

2. Aggrieved accused persons preferred an appeal before the High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh which by the impugned judgment confirmed the conviction and sentence awarded to A-1 Surinder Kumar, husband and A-4 and A-5 Surinder Kaur and Rajvinder Kaur, the sisters-in-law of the deceased. It allowed the appeal of A-2 Basawa Singh, the father-in-law and A-3 Shanti Devi, the mother-in-law of the deceased and acquitted them of the charges.

3. The present appeal before us is preferred by A-3 Rajvinder Kaur and A-4 Surinder Kaur who, at the time of the incident, were aged 18 and 16 years respectively and were unmarried. We are told at the Bar that their brother Surinder
Kumar, the husband of the deceased has not preferred any appeal, hence, the conviction and sentence imposed on him by
the two courts below has attained finality.

4. Mr. K.B. Sinha, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants, contended that both the courts below have committed serious error in accepting the prosecution case as against the appellants herein though no specific allegation
whatsoever has been made by the prosecution against them. He pointed out that the only allegation found against these appellants is in a general manner in the FIR filed by PW-6 and in the evidence of PWs.-6 and 7 in their examinations-in-chief which the learned counsel submitted under no stretch of imagination could be construed as sufficient evidence to base a conviction. He submitted that one of the ingredients necessary for establishing the allegation of harassment against an accused person under section 304B is that the concerned accused had harassed the victim soon before the death.

5. After reading the evidence of PWs.6 and 7 in conjunction with the contents of the FIR, the learned counsel pointed out that so far as the allegation against these appellants are concerned, it is omnibus in nature and has been made without any specific instance only to involve the entire family of the appellants. He pointed out that the appellants who were then 18 and 16 years of age and unmarried, could not have gone to the extent of causing such harassment which would compel the deceased to commit suicide. At any rate the learned counsel pointed out that whatever allegation that is found in the FIR and in the evidence of PWs.6 & 7, could only relate to a period immediately after the marriage of deceased to A-1 which was about 2 years prior to the incident.

6. Mr. D P Singh, learned counsel appearing for the State, however, defended the judgments of the two courts below contending that the same being a concurrent finding of fact, the same does not require any interference in this appeal. Since the present appeal is preferred by accused 4 and 5 who are the sisters-in-law of the deceased, we will confine our consideration of the evidence led by the prosecution as against them only. It is noticed, as contended by learned counsel for the appellants, that the complainant states that these appellants along with their brother used to harass Baljit Kaur for not bringing sufficient dowry and a Maruti car. In that process they used to beat the deceased. It is rather difficult to believe that these two young girls would go to the extent of beating the deceased merely based on a statement made by the brother of the deceased that too after the incident of his sister committing suicide without his evidence being corroborated in material particulars. From a perusal of the evidence of PW-6, two facts emerge. One is a general allegation of harassment against the mother of A-1 and the appellants herein. It is to be noted that mother of A-1 who was an accused has been acquitted by the courts below solely on the ground that hers and her husband's name did not find mention in the complaint even though the prosecution has alleged harassment by similar evidence as is available against the appellants. The second fact that arises out of the evidence of PW-6 is that he has made specific allegations against the husband A-1 and the father in regard to the demand of Maruti car, a buffalo, Rs.25,000 just before the death of the deceased. Therefore, this factum shows that these 2 persons might have been responsible for harassment soon before the victim's death which is one of the conditions precedent under section 304B IPC but then the High Court thought it fit to acquit the father of A-1 (father-in-law of the deceased) because his name was also not mentioned in the FIR which means the High Court did not believe the oral evidence led by the prosecution in regard to him and his wife. Therefore the evidence led by the prosecution should be appreciated in this background.

7. We have noticed neither PW-6 nor PW-7 or for that matter the complaint does give the particulars of the time and date when the alleged harassment was meted out by the appellants. As noticed by us hereinabove, these statements are omnibus in nature. The specific allegations of harassment made only involves A-1 and his father with whose case we are not concerned now. The appellants are neither parties to the demand for a buffalo or Rs.25,000 which seems to be the
proximate cause of Baljit Kaur committing suicide. The courts below in appreciating the evidence have failed to appreciate the material on record properly nor have they applied the required standard of proof necessary to base a conviction on the appellants. We have already noticed that if at all the prosecution case against these appellants is to be accepted it would only show that soon after the marriage i.e. about 2 years prior to the death of the deceased, there was some alleged harassment for lack of dowry which, in our opinion, is not a sufficient ground to hold the appellants guilty for the offence charged, since these allegations are not proximate to the death of the deceased.

8. Having perused the evidence of PW-7 also, in our opinion, the same does not further the cause of the prosecution any more than what is discussed by us hereinabove about the evidence of PW-6. As a matter of fact, a careful consideration of the evidence of PW-7 in regard to the involvement of the appellants herein clearly shows that part of the evidence of PW-7 is an improvement inasmuch as he has not stated the specific allegations now he is making before the trial court in his previous statement to the police as could be seen from exhibit D-8.
9. It is also be noted that the High Court on the same set of evidence has chosen to acquit the mother of the appellants whose case is no better than that of the appellant. Of course, the only difference between the evidence led by the prosecution in regard to their mother and the appellants is that the name of the mother is not found in the FIR. That by itself in the facts of this case is not sufficient to differentiate the case of the appellants for conviction. Even the allegation made against the appellants in the FIR assuming it to be proved shows certain harassment much before the death which is not sufficient to bring home the guilt under section 304 B IPC otherwise the evidence led by the prosecution is similar to that led against their mother. We agree with the High Court that the evidence against the mother is insufficient to convict her and in our opinion it is the same against appellants.

10. For the reasons stated above, we are of the considered opinion that the evidence led by the prosecution in regard to the involvement of the appellants in the death of Baljit Kaur is not proved beyond all reasonable doubts by the prosecution, hence, the courts below were in error in basing a conviction as against
these appellants.

11. For the reasons stated above, this appeal succeeds and the same is allowed. The appellants are on bail. Their bail-bonds shall stand discharged.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2015 (1) SCC 797
APPEARANCES
Mr. G.C. Shahpuri, Mr. Surinder Singh, Mr. Balbir Singh Gupta, Advocates for the Appellant.
Mr. Kamal Mohan Gupta, Advocate for the Respondent.
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Section 304-B - Dowry demand - Deceased died of burn injuries within 10 months of marriage - She had informed her father PW3 about harassment for dowry three months after marriage and also three days prior to incident - She was brought to parental home but again taken back by accused on threat of divorce - Next day she died - Version of PW3 corroborated version of PWs 10 & 12. Held, there was live and proximate link between death and dowry demand.
HELD
There is consistent evidence on record to prove harassment for dowry soon before the death of the deceased. The deceased died within 10 months of the marriage. According to PW3, father of the deceased, after three months of the marriage, the deceased informed him that the appellant and his family were harassing her for dowry. He, along with PW-12, went to the house of the appellant and requested them not to harass her. Again, three days before the occurrence, on 28 April, 2001, the deceased informed her father about the dowry harassment on which her uncle PW-12, along with his wife, went to the house of the accused and brought the deceased to her parental home. The appellant took her away on the threat of divorce and on the next day, she died of burn injuries. Similar version has been given by Guddar Mal (PW-10) and Raghubir Lal (PW-12). The version is supported by her death by burning. There is no other cogent reason to explain the cause of her death except the harassment for dowry. There is live and proximate link between the demand of dowry and death. In these circumstances, it cannot be held that there is no evidence of demand of dowry "soon before the death". (Para 9)

Dowry harassment - Suicide note showing depression, helplessness and inability to come out of it - No one held responsible - Whether inference can be drawn that there was no dowry demand. Held from the note it is clear that she was not happy in her matrimonial home. Ample evidence was on record to show dowry demand.
HELD
When a young married girl finds herself in helpless situation and decides to end her life, in absence of any other circumstance, it is natural to infer that she was unhappy in her matrimonial home. A suicide note cannot be treated as conclusive of there being no one responsible for the situation when evidence on record categorically points to harassment for dowry. (Para 10.1)

There is plethora of evidence to prove the demand of dowry "soon before the death" giving rise to the presumption against the appellant. (Para 11)

Section 304B - Dowry demand - Conviction by Trial Court - In appeal, High Court acquitting mother and brother of husband but upholding conviction of husband - Claim for parity, held is rejected as husband's case was distinguishable. Responsibility of husband towards wife is qualitatively different and higher as against other relatives. Conviction upheld. (Paras 12-13)

CASES REFERRED
1.Manohar Lal v. State of Haryana [JT 2014 (8) SC 265] (Para 7)

2.Hira Lal and Ors. v. State (Govt. of NCT) Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 195] (Para 10.1.)

ADARSH KUMAR GOEL, J.

1. This appeal has been preferred against Judgment and Order dated 12th March, 2013 of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No.S-736-SB of 2003 upholding the conviction of the appellant under Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code ("IPC") and sentence of Rigorous Imprisonment for seven years.

2. Case of the prosecution is that the appellant was married to the deceased Rekha Rani on 7th July, 2000. After the marriage, she was harassed for having brought insufficient dowry and the appellant raised a demand for motor cycle apart from the demands by his mother and younger brother. After about three months of marriage, the deceased gave a telephonic call to her father about the demand for dowry. Her father, Kashmiri Lal (PW-3), along with his younger brother Raghubir Lal (PW-12), met the husband of the deceased and his other relatives and pleaded that she may not be harassed as he was not in a position to give more dowry. The accused, however, continued to harass her. On 29th April, 2001, the deceased again telephoned her father about the harassment on which Raghubir Lal (PW-12) went to the house of the accused and brought back the deceased to her parental home. However, on the next day, the appellant came to the place of his in-laws and insisted that the deceased be sent with him, threatening that otherwise he will divorce her. On this, the deceased was sent with the appellant. Next day, on 1st May, 2001, at about 12 O'clock, information was received by the family of the deceased that she had received burn injuries and was taken to the hospital. Father of the deceased Kashmiri Lal (PW-3) along with his younger brother Raghubir Lal (PW-12) and brother in-law Guddar Mal (PW-10) reached the hospital at 2.00 P.M. where the deceased told them that she was given beatings and set on fire by the appellant and his family members. Thereafter, the deceased died on account of extensive burn injuries.

3. Kashmiri Lal (PW-3) lodged the First Information Report (Exhibit PA/1). SI Rakham Singh (PW-13) conducted the investigation and sent up the accused for trial. The prosecution led evidence in support of its case comprising of relatives to prove demand of dowry, apart from medical evidence and evidence of investigation. The accused denied the prosecution allegations and stated that the deceased committed suicide on account of harassment by her uncle Raghubir Lal (PW-12) who wanted her to relinquish her rights in the parental property. The accused examined Vinod Kumar (DW-1) who had taken the deceased to the hospital and stated that her relations with the accused were cordial. Raj Kumar (DW-2) employer of the appellant was also examined who stated that at the time of alleged incident, the appellant was on duty.

4. The trial Court, after considering the evidence on record, held that the prosecution case was proved beyond reasonable doubt and convicted the appellant and the co-accused.

5. On further appeal, the High Court upheld the conviction of the appellant but acquitted the co-accused Champa Devi (mother of the appellant) and Lalit Kumar (brother of the appellant).

6. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the evidence on record.

7. Appearing on behalf of the appellant, learned counsel Shri G.C. Shahpuri submitted that the prosecution failed to prove the demand of dowry "soon before the death" which was the necessary ingredient for the offence under Section 304 B, IPC. He relied upon Judgment of this Court in Manohar Lal v. State of Haryana [JT 2014 (8) SC 265]. It was also submitted that the deceased had left a suicide note (Exhibit P-4) to the effect that nobody be held responsible if something happened to her and in the said note there is no allegation of demand of dowry. He lastly submitted that since the High Court had acquitted mother and brother of the appellant on the same evidence, the case of the appellant being at par, there was no justification to convict him.

8. We have given due consideration to the submissions advanced on behalf of the appellant but we do not find any merit.

9. There is consistent evidence on record to prove harassment for dowry soon before the death of the deceased. The deceased died within 10 months of the marriage. According to PW3, father of the deceased, after three months of the marriage, the deceased informed him that the appellant and his family were harassing her for dowry. He, along with PW-12, went to the house of the appellant and requested them not to harass her. Again, three days before the occurrence, on 28 April, 2001, the deceased informed her father about the dowry harassment on which her uncle PW-12, along with his wife, went to the house of the accused and brought the deceased to her parental home. The appellant took her away on the threat of divorce and on the next day, she died of burn injuries. Similar version has been given by Guddar Mal (PW-10) and Raghubir Lal (PW-12). The version is supported by her death by burning. There is no other cogent reason to explain the cause of her death except the harassment for dowry. There is live and proximate link between the demand of dowry and death. In these circumstances, it cannot be held that there is no evidence of demand of dowry "soon before the death". In Manohar Lal (supra) relied upon on behalf of the appellant, this Court noted that there was neither any specific instance suggesting cruelty or harassment nor any of the witnesses had stated that the deceased was harassed "soon before the death" in connection with the demand of dowry. Contrary to the fact situation noticed in the said case, in the present case, all the three witnesses mentioned above - Kashmiri Lal, Guddar Mal and Raghubir Lal have specifically and categorically deposed about demand of dowry soon before her death.

10. We may now refer to the suicide note. It, inter alia, states:

"All the doors are closed for me. Besides this, no other way is available to me and I adopted the way which I liked."

10.1. The tenor of the suicide note clearly shows that the deceased was in helpless condition and she found no other way to come out of the situation. The suicide note cannot be taken to be encyclopaedia of the entire situation in which the deceased was placed. It is not possible to infer from the said note that the deceased was happy in her matrimonial home. Mere mention that nobody may be held responsible, while also stating that all the doors were closed for her and she had no other way available (except to leave the world), is not enough to exonerate the appellant. When a young married girl finds herself in helpless situation and decides to end her life, in absence of any other circumstance, it is natural to infer that she was unhappy in her matrimonial home. A suicide note cannot be treated as conclusive of there being no one responsible for the situation when evidence on record categorically points to harassment for dowry. One cannot lose sight of the fact that unfortunately the menace dowry deaths still exists in our society and has been subject of expert studies. The Law Commission, in its 91st Report dated 10th August, 1983, recommended reform of the law to deal with the situation which led to incorporation of Sections 304 B in IPC, making 'dowry death' an offence and Section 113B in the Evidence Act which provides for raising a presumption as to dowry death in case of an unnatural death within seven years of marriage when it is shown that a woman was subjected to harassment for dowry soon before her death. These aspects have been considered by this Court in Hira Lal and Ors. v. State (Govt. of NCT) Delhi [JT 2003 (6) SC 195 : 2003 (8) SCC 80] and other judgments.

11. The circumstances have thus to be appreciated in the light of the above social and legislative background. As already noted, in the present case, there is plethora of evidence to prove the demand of dowry "soon before the death" giving rise to the presumption against the appellant.

12. As regards the claim for parity of the case of the appellant with his mother and brother who have been acquitted, the High Court has rightly found his case to be distinguishable from the case of his mother and brother. The husband is not only primarily responsible for safety of his wife, he is expected to be conversant with her state of mind more than any other relative. If the wife commits suicide by setting herself on fire, proceeded by dissatisfaction of the husband and his family from the dowry, the interference of harassment against the husband may be patent. Responsibility of the husband towards his wife is qualitatively different and higher as against his other relatives.

13. On proof of the essential ingredients mentioned in Section 113 B, if the statutory presumption arises against the accused which shifts the burden on the accused, the accused must give cogent explanation. Failure to give an explanation or giving of false explanation can be taken as an additional circumstance against him. The requirement of allegations of demand of dowry against the relatives of the husband may have to be more specific and the Court may be more cautious in dealing with such allegations, if there is any doubt about over implication, but responsibility of the husband may be obvious from the circumstances. In these circumstances, the case of the appellant cannot stand at par with his mother and brother who have been acquitted by the High Court, by way of caution against over implication, as well as for want of cogent evidence against them. Case of the husband stands on different footing.

14. Thus, we have no hesitation in upholding the conviction and sentence of the appellant as we do not find any reason to interfere with the concurrent orders of the courts below in convicting and sentencing the appellant.

15. The appeal is accordingly, dismissed. The appellant is directed to surrender to undergo the remaining sentence failing which he may be arrested and committed to custody to complete the sentence awarded to him.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2007 (11) SCR 219
APPEARANCES
Mr. Sanjay R. Hegde, Advocate for the Appe-llant.
Mr. Navin Singh, Mr.Aruneshwar Gupta and Mr. Shashwat Gupta, Advocates for the Res-pondent.
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Indian Penal Code, 1860
Sections 304B and 306 read with 498A- Indian Evidence Act, 1872, Sections 113A and 113B -Unnatural death of married woman- Presumption as to dowry death- Deceased getting married to the appellant in 1991 - Right from the time immediately after the marriage deceased complaining to her parents about the persistent harassment for insufficient dowry at her matrimonial home- Relative of the woman who was sent to see her, bringing the news of her death- In-laws stating the death due to suicide - By the time the father of the deceased reached the village where she died, her body consigned to flames-Thereafter father lodging FIR against the husband and his mother only - Trial Court convicting both- High Court acquitting the mother-in-law but confirming the convict-ion and sentence imposed on the husband (appellant). Dismissing further appeal held that cruelty and harassment on account of dowry having been established by the prosecution evidence, the conviction of the appellant husband called for no interfer-ence.
HELD
The question, as to what are the ingredients of the provisions of Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code is no longer res integra. They are: (1) That the death of the woman was caused by any burns or bodily injury or in some circumstances which were not normal; (2) such death occurs within 7 years from the date of her marriage; (3) that the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband; (4) such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with the demand of dowry; and (5) it is established that such cruelty and harassment was made soon before her death. {See Harjit Singh v. State of Punjab [JT 2005 (10) SC 399]; Ram Badan Sharma v. State of Bihar [JT 2006 (7) SC 490] (Para 20)

Indisputably, before an accused is found guilty for commission of an offence, the Court must arrive at a finding that the ingredients thereof have been established. The statement of a witness for the said purpose must be read in its entirety. It is not necessary for a witness to make a statement in consonance with the wording of the section of a statute. What is needed is to find out as to whether the evidences brought on record satisfy the ingredients thereof. (Para 25)

Evidence brought on record by the prosecution clearly suggest that Pushpa had all along been subjected to harassment or cruelty only on the ground that her father had not given enough dowry at the time of marriage. For proving the said fact, it was not necessary that demand of any particular item should have been made. (Para 26)

It is not one of those cases, where omnibus allegations have been made against the members of the family. First information report was lodged against the accused persons only. Nobody else was implicated. Hazari Ram (PW-1) has been categorical in stating that Pushpa's father-in-law was a gentleman. His effort to persuade his wife and son not to harass Pushpa might not have ultimately succeeded but his attempt in that behalf was appreciated by him (PW-1) and other members of his family with gratitude. It is, therefore, cannot be said to be a case where Hazari Ram (PW-1) has falsely implicated anybody. His evidence was supported in material particulars by his brother Ranveer (PW-2). The very fact that harassment or cruelty on Pushpa did not abate even after her coming back to the matrimonial home with a son and the fact that she had been assaulted even a few days prior to the incident, in our opinion, tests of Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code stood satisfied. Ranveer (PW-2) informed his brother, Hazari Ram (PW-1), about the harassment meted out to Pushpa. He was asked to go there. He went there to find his daughter dead; her cremation having already taken place. (Para 28)

In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that no case has been made out for interference with the impugned judgment. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed. (Para 30)

CASES REFERRED
1.Ram Badan Sharma v. State of Bihar [JT 2006 (7) SC 490] (Para 20)

2.T. Aruntperunjothi v. State through SHO, Pondicherry [JT 2006 (4) SC300] (Para 21)

3.Harjit Singh v. State of Punjab [JT 2005 (10) SC 399] (Para 20)

4.Hans Raj v. State of Haryana [JT 2004 (3) SC 45] (Para 23)

5.Satvir Singh v. State of Punjab [JT 2001 (8) SC 208] (Para 22)

S.B. SINHA, J.

1. In the year 1991, Appellant married Pushpa Devi, the deceased. A male child was born to them.

2. At the time of marriage, father of Pushpa, Hazari Ram, allegedly, spent a lot of money. Appellants family, however, was not happy with the dowry given by the bride side. Pushpa was allegedly tortured and continuously harassed. She had, however, no grievance against her father in law, namely, Ram Swaroop. He had all along been assuring Pushpa and her parents that he would do his best to see that she is not harassed for not bringing enough dowry.

3. After the birth of the child, she came back to her matrimonial home. A few days prior to the incident which took place on 9.5.1994 her uncle Ranveer (PW-2) visited her. She made complaints about the harassments meted out to her. Ranveer conveyed the same to her father. On 9.5.1994, his nephew, Madan Lal (PW-7) was going to some place. Hazari Ram asked him to take him to his daughters place. On reaching the house of Pushpa, he enquired about her. No response thereto was made but later on he was informed that she had died and the dead body has been cremated. Hazari Ram allegedly came back to his village. He went back to Umawali. A Panchayat was held. Appellants family accepted the purported mistake that they should have informed Hazari Ram about the death of his daughter. It was agreed that some lands would be settled in the name of the son of Pushpa.

4. On 9.5.1994, a first information report was lodged by Hazari Ram. It appears from the records that investigating agency had been helping the accused. A purported supplementary statement of Hazari Ram was recorded wherein he had allegedly accepted that he was present at the time of funeral. A final form was submitted. However, a protest petition was filed whereupon cognizance of the offence under Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (Code) was taken. Charges were framed under Section 304B of the Code and in the alternative under Section 306 read with Section 498A thereof. The Trial Court convicted both the accused, namely, Devi Lal and his mother Sukh Devi.

5. An appeal having been preferred by the accused thereagainst before the High Court, the appeal of the appellant was dismissed; but that of Sukh Devi was allowed.

6. Mr. Sanjay Hegde, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, would submit that the High Court committed an error in passing the impugned judgment insofar as it failed to take into consideration that no demand of dowry was made in respect of any specific item. It was urged that the prosecution has also not proved as to whether the purported harassment meted out to the deceased was as a result of demand of dowry or not. Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, whereupon reliance has been placed by learned Trial Judge as also the High Court, Mr. Parekh would contend, is not attracted to the facts of the present case.

7. Mr. Naveen Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Rajasthan, on the other hand, submitted that from the deposition of the prosecution witnesses, it would be evident that all the ingredients of Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code have been proved.

8. Defence of the accused before the learned Trial Judge was that as Pushpa Devi delivered a child, the societal norms by way of custom demanded that the occasion be celebrated by offering gifts and distributing sweets, meal etc. by the maternal grandfather of the child. It was pointed out that almost at the same time, elder brother Banwari Lal's wife also delivered a child and there was a big celebration. Pushpa wanted his father to celebrate the function of her son in a similar manner. But the same was not done. She not only came back from her parents house but after a few days committed suicide. It was furthermore the case of the defence that Hazari Ram was informed about the death of his daughter through one Nand Ram, pursuant whereto, he attended the funeral. Prior thereto, a village panchayat was held and he was informed about his right to lodge a first information report but he declined to do so as a representation was made that some land would be transferred in the name of the child.

9. The fact that death of Pushpa took place within the period of seven years from the date of marriage is not in dispute. Unnatural death of Pushpa is also not in dispute.

10. Hazari Ram examined himself as PW-1. According to him, he gave to his daughter at the time of her marriage articles beyond his capacity, but the familymembersofthe appe-llant were not pleased with the amount of dowry given and, therefore, they used to harass Pushpa. According to him, Ram Swaroop, father of the appellant, was a gentleman and he had all along been assuring him that they would try to make the appellant and his mother understand but they had not been heeding his advice. He categorically stated that even after the delivery of child, Pushpa asked him to call his father-in-law so that would be pleased. She had also asked him to give some gifts to him. Ram Swaroop came to his place and took his daughter-in-law back. He stated that whenever he would go to his daughter-in-laws house, Ram Swaroop used to assure him with folded hands that he would make Devi Lal and his mother understand. Five to seven days prior to the death of his daughter, his brother Ranveer had gone to meet her. He had informed him about the beating and harassment to his daughter and that he was asked to visit his daughters place. He, in his examination-in-chief, supported the statement made by him in his first information report.

11. We may notice that Ranveer (PW-2) in his deposition before the learned Trial Judge, stated :

"My brother had given a good dowry and articles to his daughter according to capacity. Thereafter, whenever, the girl returned back to her parents house from her in-laws house, she told to us that my in-laws persons are not happy with the articles of this dowry and trouble me. Later on, I along with my brother went to Umewali and said that do not trouble and harass her. As possible, we will give continuously more dowry. My brother told me to meet my niece. I went to meet the girl prior to 5-7 days of death of her. When I went to meet, the girl started to weeping and said that they trouble and harass to me. I returned back after advised to her. I narrated this to my brother that they (in-laws persons) trouble and harass to the girl, taking the issue of dowry."

12. PW-7, Madan Lal, was the nephew of Hazari Ram. He took Hazari Ram to the village Umewala on 9th May, 1994. After visiting the house of his daughter, Hazari Ram came back and told him "they have murdered to pushpa (sic) and cremated".

13. We need not notice the deposition of other witnesses who had turned hostile.

14. Some witnesses were examined on behalf of the appellant. According to them, Hazari Ram when asked by the elders of the village as to whether he had any doubt on any person as regards the death of Pushpa or whether he intended to inform the Police, answered in the negative stating that he would not take recourse thereto. The said witnesses, however, accepted that they had come to depose in court only at the instance of the appellant.

15. It is significant to note that even in the first information report, Hazari Ram categorically stated that no assistance had been rendered to him by the villagers.

16. Two courts have concurrently accepted the evidence of the prosecution witnesses. The testimonies of the prosecution witnesses have been relied on for arriving at the finding of guilt of the appellant. We do not see any reason to take a different view.

17.The core question which has been raised for our consideration in this appeal is as to whether a case had been made out for application of Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act (the Act).

18. The Parliament by Act No.46 of 1983 and Act No.43 of 1986 inserted Sections 113A and 113B in the Act. They read as under :

"113A. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman- When the question is whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown that she had committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the Court may presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her husband.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" shall have the same meaning as in section 498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

113B. Presumption as to dowry death. When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman has been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.-

Explanation.- "For the purposes of this section "dowry death" shall have the same meaning as in section 304B, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)."

19. Section 113A of the Act relates to offences under Sections 498-A and 306 of the Code, whereas Section 113B relates to Section 304-B thereof. Whereas in terms of Section 113A of the Act, the prosecution is required to prove that the deceased was subjected to cruelty, in terms of Section 113B, the prosecution must prove that the deceased was -subject by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry".

20. The question, as to what are the ingredients of the provisions of Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code is no longer res integra. They are: (1) That the death of the woman was caused by any burns or bodily injury or in some circumstances which were not normal; (2) such death occurs within 7 years from the date of her marriage; (3) that the victim was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband; (4) such cruelty or harassment should be for or in connection with the demand of dowry; and (5) it is established that such cruelty and harassment was made soon before her death. {See Harjit Singh v. State of Punjab1, Ram Badan Sharma v. State of Bihar2.

21. In T. Aruntperunjothi v. State through SHO, Pondicherry3, this Court held :

"It is now well settled in view of a catena of decisions of this Court that what would constitute "soon before her death" depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case."

22. Distinction between Section 113A and 113B was noticed by the Court in Satvir Singh v. State of Punjab4, stating:

"No doubt, Section 306 IPC read with Section 113-A of the Evidence Act is wide enough to take care of an offence under Section 304-B also. But the latter is made a more serious offence by providing a much higher sentence and also by imposing a minimum period of imprisonment as the sentence. In other words, if death occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within 7 years of the marriage as a sequel to the cruelty or harassment inflicted on a woman with demand of dowry, soon before her death, Parliament intended such a case to be treated as a very serious offence punishable even up to imprisonment for life in appropriate cases. It is for the said purpose that such cases are separated from the general category provided under Section 306 IPC (read with Section 113-A of the Evidence Act) and made a separate offence."

23. In Hans Raj v. State of Haryana1, this Court held:

"13. Unlike Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act, a statutory presumption does not arise by operation of law merely on proof of the circumstances enumerated in Section 113-A of the Indian Evidence Act. Under Section 113-A of the Indian Evidence Act, the prosecution has first to establish that the woman concerned committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her husband (in this case) had subjected her to cruelty. Even if these facts are established the court is not bound to presume that the suicide had been abetted by her husband. Section 113-A gives a discretion to the court to raise such a presumption, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, which means that where the allegation is of cruelty it must consider the nature of cruelty to which the woman was subjected, having regard to the meaning of the word "cruelty" in Section 498-A IPC. The mere fact that a woman committed suicide within seven years of her marriage and that she had been subjected to cruelty by her husband, does not automatically give rise to the presumption that the suicide had been abetted by her husband. The court is required to look into all the other circumstances of the case. One of the circumstances which has to be considered by the court is whether the alleged cruelty was of such nature as was likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health of the woman."

24. Submissions of Mr. Hegde that as Hazari Ram (PW-1) in his deposition did not categorically state that Pushpa was subjected to harassment for and in connection with any demand of dowry soon before her death, no case for convicting the appellant under Section 304-B has been made out.

25. Indisputably, before an accused is found guilty for commission of an offence, the Court must arrive at a finding that the ingredients thereof have been established. The statement of a witness for the said purpose must be read in its entirety. It is not necessary for a witness to make a statement in consonance with the wording of the section of a statute. What is needed is to find out as to whether the evidences brought on record satisfy the ingredients thereof.

26. Evidence brought on record by the prosecution clearly suggest that Pushpa had all along been subjected to harassment or cruelty only on the ground that her father had not given enough dowry at the time of marriage. For proving the said fact, it was not necessary that demand of any particular item should have been made.

27. Evidence of Hazari Ram (PW-1) and his brother Ranveer (PW-2) go a long a way to establish the ingredients of offence. Reading their testimonies in their entirety, we have no doubt in our mind that the harassment and cruelty meted out to Pushpa was for and in connection with the demand of dowry. Demand of dowry did not abate at any point of time. Demands were made both before and after the birth of the son. A plain reading of the deposition of Hazari Ram (PW-1) would categorically show that Pushpa's father-in-law, Ram Swaroop had all along been apologetic. He persuaded the appellant and his mother not to insist for dowry or at least not harass her therefor. He, however, did not succeed in his efforts. Sentimental attachment of Pushpa to her father-in-law becomes apparent when we find that after giving birth to a male child she requested her father to invite him and give him some gifts so that he would be pleased.

28. It is not one of those cases, where omnibus allegations have been made against the members of the family. First information report was lodged against the accused persons only. Nobody else was implicated. Hazari Ram (PW-1) has been categorical in stating that Pushpa's father-in-law was a gentleman. His effort to persuade his wife and son not to harass Pushpa might not have ultimately succeeded but his attempt in that behalf was appreciated by him (PW-1) and other members of his family with gratitude. It is, therefore, cannot be said to be a case where Hazari Ram (PW-1) has falsely implicated anybody. His evidence was supported in material particulars by his brother Ranveer (PW-2). The very fact that harassment or cruelty on Pushpa did not abate even after her coming back to the matrimonial home with a son and the fact that she had been assaulted even a few days prior to the incident, in our opinion, tests of Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code stood satisfied. Ranveer (PW-2) informed his brother, Hazari Ram (PW-1), about the harassment meted out to Pushpa. He was asked to go there. He went there to find his daughter dead; her cremation having already taken place.

29. Learned Trial Judge, as also the High Court commented upon the manner in which the Police made all efforts to help the accused. The investigating officer purported to have recorded a supplementary statement of Hazari Ram (PW-1) which, according to the learned Trial Judge, was not at all necessary. Recording of the said supplementary statement has been disbelieved by the courts below.

30. In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that no case has been made out for interference with the impugned judgment. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Sections 306, 304B - Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, Section 211 - Evidence Act, 1872, Sections 3, 113B - Offences under - Evidence - Driving a married woman to commit suicide - Conviction under Section 304B converted to Section 306 - No charge under Section 306 framed - If conviction under Section 306 justified. Held that High Court was justified as there was no demand of dowry. Sangaraboina Sreenu's [JT 1997 (5) SC 47] case held not applicable with Shamnsaheb M. Multtani's [JT 2001 (2) SC 92] case.
HELD
There was no evidence of any demand for dowry soon before the death, and there was no demand whatsoever that the house in question should be transferred to either of the accused. Under Section 304B IPC, the cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband "for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry" is a prelude to the suicidal death of the wife. Such suicidal death is defined as 'dowry death'. The High Court has recorded a firm finding that the harassment was not for or in connection with any demands for dowry. But, at the same time, the High Court has concluded that the wife committed suicide due to the harassment of the appellant, in particular. In such circumstances, the High Court was, therefore, fully justified in convicting the appellant under Section 306 IPC. (Para 10)

The High Court upon meticulous scrutiny of the entire evidence on record rightly concluded that there was no evidence to indicate the commission of offence under Section 304B IPC. It was also observed that the deceased had committed suicide due to harassment meted out to her by the appellant but there was no evidence on record to suggest that such harassment or cruelty was made in connection to any dowry demands. Thus, cruelty or harassment sans any dowry demands which drives the wife to commit suicide attracts the offence of 'abetment of suicide' under Section 306 IPC and not Section 304B IPC which defines the offence and punishment for 'dowry death'. (Para 11.3.)

Mere omission or defect in framing charge would not disable the Court from convicting the accused for the offence which has been found to be proved on the basis of the evidence on record. In such circumstances, the matter would fall within the purview of Section 221 (1) and (2) of the Cr.P.C. In the facts of the present case, the High Court very appropriately converted the conviction under Section 304B to one under Section 306 IPC. (Para 12)

CASES REFERRED
1.Shamnsaheb M. Multtani v. State of Karnataka [JT 2001 (2) SC 92] (held not applicable) (Para 11)

2.Sangaraboina Sreenu v. State of A.P. [JT 1997 (5) SC 47] (held not applicable) (Para 11)

SURINDER SINGH NIJJAR, J.

1. This appeal has been filed against the judgment and order dated 6th October, 2004 of the Punjab and Haryana High Court at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No. 406-SB of 1992 wherein the appellant has been convicted under Section 306 Indian Penal Code ('IPC' for short) and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default of payment thereof to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for one month.

2. We may briefly notice the facts.

2.1. Sukhjit Kaur, alias Rani was married to Narwinder Singh of Village Mehdipur on 30th September, 1984. A male child had first been born to the couple and at the time of the incident, the wife was pregnant a second time. According to the in-laws of the appellant, they had given sufficient dowry at the marriage of their daughter to the appellant. It appears that the appellant and his parents Daljit Singh and Joginder Kaur remained dissatisfied. About two months after the marriage, Sukhjit Kaur informed her mother Gursharan Kaur that her in-laws were asking her to bring valuable articles such as a scooter from her parents. It is also the case of the prosecution that an additional demand of Rs.5,000/- was made by Narwinder Singh, in the year 1986, which amount too was paid by his mother-in-law Gursharan Kaur. Unfortunately, on 25th May, 1987, Bhai Davinder Singh, father of Sukhjit Kaur was murdered by extremists. After the death of Bhai Davinder Singh, there was sea-change in the attitude of the appellant and her parents, and they started maltreating her. About six months prior to the fatal incident, there had been a quarrel between the husband and wife, which was settled with the intervention of several relatives including Kulbir Singh and Onkar Singh, PW-5. About ten days prior to the incident, Sukhjit Kaur went to Onkar Singh's house in Village Nabipur and informed him that the accused were demanding Rs.50,000/-. They were saying that her late father had left enough money for the family and that she should get her share. Onkar Singh told her that he would inform Gursharan Kaur, who was then living in England about the demand and seek instructions from her. Unfortunately, on 30th May, 1988, Onkar Singh came to know about the death of his niece Sukhjit Kaur (hereinafter referred to as 'the deceased'). He alongwith Gurjit Kaur, sister of the deceased, Hanwant Singh, Darshan Singh and Mohan Singh went to village Mehdipur and saw the dead body of Sukhjit Kaur alias Rani lying in the house. Blood was oozing from her nose. Onkar Singh, thereafter, lodged a FIR naming the accused as having been responsible for her death. Initially, a case under Section 306 IPC was registered against the accused but, a charge under Section 304-B of the IPC was ultimately framed by the Court.

3. In support of its case, the prosecution relied inter-alia on the evidence of Kulbir Singh (PW-2) and Onkar Singh (PW-5), both uncles of the deceased, Gursharan Kaur (PW-6) the mother and Gurjit Kaur (PW-7). The sister of Sukhjit Kaur stated that the demands made by the accused had been satisfied off and on and that the behaviour of the accused had compelled Sukhjit Kaur to commit suicide. The prosecution also relied upon the evidence of Dr. H.S. Bajwa (PW-3), who on the basis of the report of the Forensic Science Laboratory opined that she had died of Organo Phosphorus poisoning. A large number of documents including some letters allegedly written by the deceased to her family members and by them to her were also produced in evidence.

4. The prosecution case was then put to the accused and their statements recorded under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. They denied the allegations levelled against them and pleaded that as a matter of fact Sukhjit Kaur had fallen ill as she was pregnant and depressed after the murder of her father (to whom she had been deeply attached) and that she had been taken to Oberoi Hospital by her father-in-law on seeing her condition deteriorating, and that despite all efforts on the part of the accused to save her, she had died. The accused also produced three witnesses in defence, namely Hardev Singh (DW-1), Jarnail Singh (DW-2) and Pritam Singh (DW-3), as also certain letters written inter-se the parties.

5. The trial court held that from the evidence of Kulbir Singh, Onkar Singh, Gursharan Kaur and Gurjit Kaur (PWs) and the letter Ex.P.1, it appeared that demands for dowry had been made by the accused from Sukhjit Kaur time and again and that she had been harassed and thus compelled to commit suicide. It further held that the ingredients of Section 304-B IPC were satisfied on the presumptions raised under Section 113B of the Evidence Act with regard to dowry deaths and that the letters Exs. PA, PB, PC, PD and PE did not in any way show that the relation between the parties had been cordial. The trial court accordingly convicted the accused for an offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC, and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years and to fine and in default of payment of fine to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for a specified period.

6. Aggrieved, against the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the appellant and his parents filed an appeal before the Punjab and Haryana High Court. Upon reconsideration of the entire evidence, the High Court concluded that the deceased had not committed suicide on account of demands for dowry but due to harassment caused by the husband, in particular. The appeal was, therefore, partly allowed. The High Court acquitted the parents of the appellant. However, the conviction of the appellant was converted from one under Section 304-B IPC to Section 306 IPC. He was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default of payment, he has to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for one month. The aforesaid judgment is challenged in the present appeal.

7. Mr. Vikram Mahajan, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that there is no distinction between the case of the appellant and that of his parents, who have been acquitted. The High Court having acquitted the parents, the appellant also could not have been convicted. He further submitted that this was a plain and simple case of suicide due to the mental state of the deceased. He submits that since the murder of her father by extremists, the deceased had been under acute depression and she, therefore, had suicidal tendencies. Learned senior counsel further submitted that there is no evidence on the record to show that the victim had died an unnatural death. Lastly, it is submitted that the High Court committed a grave error in convicting the appellant under Section 306 IPC. It is submitted by Mr. Mahajan that the nature of offence under Section 304-B IPC is distinct and different from the offence under Section 306 IPC. The basic constituent of an offence under Section 304-B IPC is homicidal death (dowry death) and those of Section 306 IPC is suicidal death and abetment thereof. Furthermore, according to the learned senior counsel, the nature of evidence required under both the categories of offences are totally different. The appellant was never charged under Section 306 IPC, nor is there any evidence on the record to sustain the conviction under Section 306 IPC.

8. Mr. Kuldip Singh, learned counsel, appearing for the State of Punjab submits that the appellant is in fact fortunate being convicted only under Section 306 IPC. There is overwhelming evidence to prove that the appellant and his parents had been harassing the deceased to bring more dowry. He submits that there is evidence that the wife had been subjected to harassment on account of dowry immediately after the marriage. The death occurred within seven years of marriage, therefore, by virtue of Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, the trial court had rightly presumed that the appellant and his parents had committed the offence under Section 304-B IPC.

9. We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel. The High Court, upon close scrutiny of the evidence, concluded that there was evidence of a quarrel between the husband and wife about six months prior to the occurrence, which had been settled with the intervention of the eldest. There were complaints that the deceased did not know how to do any household work. The in-laws had also complained that she was not well mannered. Their ill-treatment of the wife escalated after the murder of her father by extremists. It was at that stage the husband had started demanding that the deceased should claim one of the two houses left behind by her father in Village Nabipur. About ten months prior to her death, she was actually sent by the appellants to demand possession of the house. The appellant and his parents were suspecting that the sister of the deceased, Gurjit Kaur had taken everything after the death of the father of the deceased. The appellant and his parents were insisting that the house be legally conveyed in the name of the deceased. However, mother of the deceased left for England after the first death anniversary of her husband in May, 1988. The High Court, on examination of the entire evidence, concluded that the deceased had not committed suicide on account of demands for dowry but due to harassment caused by her husband, in particular. The deceased had committed suicide by drinking Organo Phosphorus poison. In view of the findings recorded, the High Court converted the conviction of the appellant from one under Section 304-B IPC to one under Section 306 IPC.

10. We do not find much substance in the submission of Mr. Mahajan that the High Court could not have convicted the appellant under Section 306 IPC as the charge had been framed under Section 304-B IPC. On scrutiny of the entire evidence, the High Court has come to the conclusion that the deceased had not committed suicide on account of demands for dowry but due to harassment caused by her husband, in particular. The harassment by the appellant had compounded the acute depression from which the deceased was suffering after the murder of her father. There was no evidence of any demand for dowry soon before the death, and there was no demand whatsoever that the house in question should be transferred to either of the accused. Under Section 304-B IPC, the cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband "for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry" is a prelude to the suicidal death of the wife. Such suicidal death is defined as 'dowry death'. The High Court has recorded a firm finding that the harassment was not for or in connection with any demands for dowry. But, at the same time, the High Court has concluded that the wife committed suicide due to the harassment of the appellant, in particular. In such circumstances, the High Court was, therefore, fully justified in convicting the appellant under Section 306 IPC.

11. We also do not find any substance in the submission of Mr. Mahajan that the appellant could not have been convicted under Section 306 IPC in the absence of a charge being framed against him under the aforesaid section. The learned counsel had relied upon the judgments of this court in the case of Sangaraboina Sreenu v. State of A.P. [JT 1997 (5) SC 47 : 1997 (5) SCC 348] and Shamnsaheb M. Multtani v. State of Karnataka [JT 2001 (2) SC 92 : 2001 (2) SCC 577]. We are of the opinion that the aforesaid judgments are of no assistance to the appellant, in the facts and circumstances of the present case. We may, however, notice the observations made therein. In the case of Sangaraboina Sreenu (supra), it was observed as follows:

"This appeal must succeed for the simple reason that having acquitted the appellant of the charge under Section 302 IPC -- which was the only charge framed against him -- the High Court could not have convicted him of the offence under Section 306 IPC. It is true that Section 222 CrPC entitles a court to convict a person of an offence which is minor in comparison to the one for which he is tried but Section 306 IPC cannot be said to be a minor offence in relation to an offence under Section 302 IPC within the meaning of Section 222 CrPC for the two offences are of distinct and different categories. While the basic constituent of an offence under Section 302 IPC is homicidal death, those of Section 306 IPC are suicidal death and abetment thereof."

11.1. In the present case, both the trial court and the High Court have held that the deceased had committed suicide. Therefore, the nature of the offence under Sections 304-B and 306 IPC are not distinct and different categories.

11.2. Again in the case of Shamnsaheb M. Multtani (supra), this court observed:

"18. So when a person is charged with an offence under Sections 302 and 498A IPC on the allegation that he caused the death of a bride after subjecting her to harassment with a demand for dowry, within a period of 7 years of marriage, a situation may arise, as in this case, that the offence of murder is not established as against the accused. Nonetheless, all other ingredients necessary for the offence under Section 304-B IPC would stand established. Can the accused be convicted in such a case for the offence under Section 304-B IPC without the said offence forming part of the charge?

19. A two-Judge Bench of this Court (K. Jayachandra Reddy and G.N. Ray, JJ.) has held in Lakhjit Singh v. State of Punjab that if a prosecution failed to establish the offence under Section 302 IPC, which alone was included in the charge, but if the offence under Section 306 IPC was made out in the evidence it is permissible for the court to convict the accused of the latter offence.

20. But without reference to the above decision, another two-Judge Bench of this Court (M.K. Mukherjee and S.P. Kurdukar, JJ.) has held in Sangaraboina Sreenu v. State of A.P. that it is impermissible to do so. The rationale advanced by the Bench for the above position is this:

"It is true that Section 222 CrPC entitles a court to convict a person of an offence which is minor in comparison to the one for which he is tried but Section 306 IPC cannot be said to be a minor offence in relation to an offence under Section 302 IPC within the meaning of Section 222 CrPC for the two offences are of distinct and different categories. While the basic constituent of an offence under Section 302 IPC is homicidal death, those of Section 306 IPC are suicidal death and abetment thereof."

21. The crux of the matter is this: Would there be occasion for a failure of justice by adopting such a course as to convict an accused of the offence under Section 304-B IPC when all the ingredients necessary for the said offence have come out in evidence, although he was not charged with the said offence? In this context a reference to Section 464(1) of the Code is apposite:

"464. (1) No finding, sentence or order by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any misjoinder of charges, unless, in the opinion of the court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby".

(emphasis supplied)

22. In other words, a conviction would be valid even if there is any omission or irregularity in the charge, provided it did not occasion a failure of justice.

23. We often hear about "failure of justice" and quite often the submission in a criminal court is accentuated with the said expression. Perhaps it is too pliable or facile an expression which could be fitted in any situation of a case. The expression "failure of justice" would appear, sometimes, as an etymological chameleon (the simile is borrowed from Lord Diplock in Town Investments Ltd. v. Deptt. of the Environment). The criminal court, particularly the superior court should make a close examination to ascertain whether there was really a failure of justice or whether it is only a camouflage."

11.3. We are of the considered opinion that the aforesaid observations do not apply to the facts of the present case. The High Court upon meticulous scrutiny of the entire evidence on record rightly concluded that there was no evidence to indicate the commission of offence under Section 304-B IPC. It was also observed that the deceased had committed suicide due to harassment meted out to her by the appellant but there was no evidence on record to suggest that such harassment or cruelty was made in connection to any dowry demands. Thus, cruelty or harassment sans any dowry demands which drives the wife to commit suicide attracts the offence of 'abetment of suicide' under Section 306 IPC and not Section 304-B IPC which defines the offence and punishment for 'dowry death'.

12. It is a settled proposition of law that mere omission or defect in framing charge would not disable the Court from convicting the accused for the offence which has been found to be proved on the basis of the evidence on record. In such circumstances, the matter would fall within the purview of Section 221 (1) and (2) of the Cr.P.C. In the facts of the present case, the High Court very appropriately converted the conviction under Section 304-B to one under Section 306 IPC.

13. In our opinion, there has been no failure of justice in the conviction of the appellant under Section 306 IPC by the High Court, even though the specific charge had not been framed.

14. Therefore, we see no reason to interfere with the judgment of the High Court. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

**********
