HEADNOTE
CUSTOMARY LAWS
Scheduled District Act, 1974
Section 6 - Rules for Administration of Justice and Police in Nagaland, 1937 - Rules 29 and 62 - Customary laws - Recognition of - Resolution of disputes by the Customary courts in Nagaland - Two clans of two villages claiming access to the source of water and the ownership of land in which the water source is situated - Customary court holding in favour of the appellants belonging to the Sai clan - Appellate authority however allowing the appeal preferred by the respondents belonging to Pongen clan - On further appeal Single Judge of High Court accepting the case of the appellants that without framing issue on the ownership of the land the dispute regarding the land could not have been decided by the appellate authority and accordingly remitting the issue of ownership of the land to the appellate authority - Appellate authority thereafter recording additional evidence and submitting the record to the High Court -Single Judge ultimately holding that the ownership of the disputed land vested with the respondents. Partly allowing the appeal, held that the High Court not having allowed the parties to file fresh pleadings in relation to the additional issue remitted, serious prejudice was caused to the case of the appellants. Therefore the decision of the High Court on the additional issue of ownership of the land in dispute cannot be sustained. The subject matter of the dispute needed decision on the customary law applicable to the parties. Both parties will have joint and equal right to the water source in the disputed land and no member of either clan shall restrict the access to any one of the two village communities. Dispute regarding ownership of the land left open to be decided by the competent village court in terms of the 1937 Rules if disputes were to arise in future.
HELD
In view of the peculiar substantive and procedural law as contained in the rules applicable to hill districts of Nagaland, the village disputes, particularly with regard to the source of water and the land in which it is situated, was required to be decided not as an adversarial litigation but as a subject matter requiring solution in a spirit of accommodation and adjustment of conflicting rights of the members of two contesting clans. In the village courts customary law is required to be applied and the adjudicatory process requires of the adjudicating forums to make all possible efforts to resolve the dispute by mutual agreement and achieve a consensus. The disputes in villages like the one involved in the present case regarding access to the source of water and right and title to the land in which the source exists, needed a resolution so as to best serve the demands of all members of the two village communities who had raised the dispute. Villagers in disputes arising inter se between them concerning exercise of community rights to natural resources like land and water can never feel satisfied by a mere formal decision of such disputes in favour of one or the other party. Instead of decision they need a satisfactory solution of such disputes for their mutual benefits. (Para 18)

In adopting a course of remitting the issue of ownership of land in which the water source exists, the High Court has deprived the village court as the primary court to make an effort to resolve the dispute between the two clans of the two villages amicably and on consensus. It is to be noted that under the rule 55, against decision of village court, appeal is provided to the district customary court. It is after the appellate authority decides the dispute that the matter can be brought to the High Court by way of an appeal by the aggrieved party. (Para 19)

The learned single judge of the High Court by remitting the issue of ownership to the district customary court for recording evidence on the additional issue and deciding the case on such evidence has virtually acted like the original court. As the dispute is first required to be handled in the spirit of co-operation with all efforts to arrive at a consensus in the village court, the procedure adopted by the High Court in deciding the issue of ownership of the land as the original court was not in accordance with the rules which provide a less formal procedure and application of customary law. The issue about the ownership of land in which the water source exists, if at all, was found to be important, should have been allowed to be raised in the primary court i.e. the village court and then, if necessary agitated before the district court through an appeal. Undertaking exercise of deciding the said dispute of ownership of the land by the High Court for the first time in appeal was not in accordance with the letter and spirit of the rules. (Para 20)

As we have noted above, during the pendency of this appeal, the counsel of the appellants have expressed no objection to the respondents representing the other village from drawing water from the source situate in the disputed land on the condition that the respondents representing the other village should acknowledge the ownership of the said water course of the appellants. On such a statement made and recorded in the order of this Court, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, despite being granted repeated time gave no response. Eventually, therefore this Court granted leave and entertained this appeal. For want of easy means of communication from the clients we can well realize the helplessness of the counsel representing tribal and village population residing in such remote corners of the country. As we have stated above, the disputes of village community particularly relating to access to land having water source is not a traditional civil litigation as is handled by ordinary civil courts under the Code of Civil Procedure. These are disputes to be dealt with and handled only on the basis of customs of the village communities and through a very informal procedure contained in the rules. So far as natural resources like land and water are concerned dispute of ownership is not very relevant because undoubtedly the State is the sovereign dominant owner. (Para 23)

In the aforesaid circumstances and in view of the peculiar nature of the subject matter of dispute which needed decision on customary law applicable to the parties, we do not think it necessary to again allow the parties to litigate the issue of ownership of the land. In the situation obtaining before us, where both the learned counsel appearing on either side have no latest information and instructions on the subject matter of the dispute and keeping in view long passage of time, in our considered opinion this appeal can be disposed of by declaring that the village communities in two clans of two villages would have a joint and equal right to the water source in the disputed land. None of the members of the two contesting clans or communities in the two villages shall restrict access to any one of the two village communities to the common water source. After setting aside the order of the High Court and its decision on dispute of ownership of the land measuring two acres, we leave the dispute of ownership open for being raised by any of the contesting parties, if a cause of action for the same arises in future, in the competent village court for its resolutions in accordance with the provisions of the rules. We, however, hope that such conflict or cause of action would never arise and without raising the dispute of ownership of the land, the two village communities will peacefully and in orderly manner regulate their rights of drawing water from the source for their common benefit. (Para 24)


DHARMADHIKARI, J.

1. This appeal arises from a dispute between two clans of two villages in the hill district of Mokokchung in North-Eastern State of Nagaland. The dispute between the two clans of the two villages is concerning the access to the source of water and the ownership of the suit land which is described as 'Jakoktsuba' by the appellants and 'Mezenteraba' by the respondents. Without going into greater details, it is sufficient to state that the appellants herein represent Sai (Soya) clan of Longkhum village and the respondents represent the Pongen clan of Mangmetong village.

2. The dispute to the water source and the land arose sometime in the year 1985 as the boundary pillars of the two villages were alleged to have been disturbed by some villagers.

3. At the outset, it may be stated that the civil rights to the water source and the land in the hill district of Nagaland comprising the two villages mentioned above are not governed by any codified law contained in Code of Civil Procedure and the Evidence Act. The parties are governed by customary law applicable to the tribal and the rural population of hill district of Nagaland. The customary law has been recognised by framing - Rules for Administration of Justice and Police in Nagaland 1937 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules') by Governor of Assam in exercise of powers under section 6 of the Scheduled District Act 1874. The aforesaid Rules were amended in the years 1984 and 1989. The civil justice system provides for hierarchy of courts. The lowest original village court is called 'Dobhasis', which can try and decide civil cases referred to it by the Deputy Commissioner or Additional Deputy Commissioner or Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner, as the case may be. Dobhasis court comprises of village authorities like Mauzadars Gaonbura, Chiefs and Headman of Khels with other village elders. The procedure in Dobhasis or village court is less formal. The proceedings are viva voce. Efforts are required to be made under the Rules to abide by the decision of their Panchayats. An appeal is provided to District Customary Court and a further appeal can be filed to the High Court under Rule 29. Rule 62(2) provides the procedure of these village courts and customary court, as under :

"Rule 62 (2). The district customary court and the subordinate district customary court in deciding civil suits shall follow the customs and usages applicable to such suits and cases and shall adjudicate all such suits and cases according to justice, equity, good conscience and the customs and usages applicable."

Sub-rule (3) of the said Rule reads as under:-

"Rule 62 (3). The district customary court and the subordinate district customary court shall follow in matters of procedure the spirit of the Code of Civil Procedure in matters not covered by customs and usages followed in the district."

4. The aforesaid mentioned 1937 Rules recognizing customary law and providing forums of subordinate customary district and district court for resolving disputes among the tribals and villagers came to be amended on 14.3.1989 by incorporating Rule 24(1) providing filing of pleadings by parties in dispute of civil nature.

5. The brief background of the dispute is as under :-

The village boundaries of two villages concerned are said to have been demarcated by erecting pillars in the year 1942. The disputes with regard to the land measuring about 2 acres and the water source available therein is alleged to have arisen in the year 1985 when according to the appellants, they saw that the members of the clan in village represented by respondents removed the pillars and encroached on the disputed land for use of the water source. The appellants filed a complaint on 3.5.1985 before the additional deputy commissioner who endorsed the dispute for decision to the village customary court viz., Dobhasis court.

6. The Dobhasis court after examining the witnesses and conducting spot verification came to the conclusion that the disputed land in which the water source is situated belongs to the Sai clan of Longkhum village represented by the appellants.

7. The villagers represented by the respondents went in appeal to addl. deputy commissioner (judicial) on 12.12.1985. They also prayed for a de novo trial by the addl. deputy commissioner.

8. As has been mentioned earlier, at the time when complaint was filed raising dispute, there was no law strictly governing the pleadings. The provision requiring filing of pleadings was introduced by amendment to the Rules made in the year 1989. Before the addl. deputy commissioner, the appellants had submitted a written statement to the appeal filed by the respondents. The addl. deputy commissioner framed eight issues on the disputes raised by the villagers but no issue regarding the ownership of the land in which the water source exists was framed for trial.

9. The additional deputy commissioner after trying the issues with regard to the dispute to the water source, allowed the appeal of the respondents and declared their title both to the water source as also the land in dispute.

10. Aggrieved by the decision of the addl. deputy commissioner, the appellants preferred an appeal to the Kohima bench of Gauhati High Court. The learned single judge of the High Court accepted the contention of the appellants that without framing issue on the ownership of the land, the dispute regarding land could not have been decided by the addl. deputy commissioner. The High Court, therefore, passed an order on 20.6.1996 remitting an additional issue on the ownership of land to the addl. deputy commissioner for recording evidence on that issue and submitting the record of evidence to the High Court for deciding the appeal. The additional issue framed reads as under :-

"Whether the plaintiff or the defendant is owner of disputed land and possess the disputed land measuring about 2 acres of land lying between Mangmetong and Longkhum villages."

11. The additional deputy commissioner, thereafter, recorded additional evidence of the parties on the additional issue and submitted the record of the evidence to the High Court.

12. The learned single judge of the High Court on the basis of additional evidence recorded on the additional issue decided the appeal against the present appellants. As the additional evidence was recorded by the addl. deputy commissioner and submitted to the High Court, in deciding the issue of ownership of land the High Court acted like the original court. The learned single judge in the impugned judgment held inter alia that the ownership to the disputed land claimed by the respondents was not specifically denied by the present appellants in the written statement which they had submitted in the appeal before the addl. deputy commissioner. The learned single judge also referred to the evidence of other witnesses in which it was stated that the land was forest land. The learned single judge, however, gave much importance to the fact that the respondents had been exercising rights of ownership on the land by collecting forest produce without any objection from the villagers represented by the appellants. It also made a reference to the version of witnesses that as per the custom prevailing amongst the clans, as and when, the members of the clan represented by the appellants used the water source, a tea party was thrown to the members of the clan of the respondents indicating recognition of the title to the water source of the other clan. It is on the above grounds and appreciation of the oral evidence of the parties, the High Court came to the conclusion that the ownership of the disputed land is with the respondents.

13. In the present appeal, for want of necessary instructions, the learned counsel engaged by the appellants has not been able to assist the Court in the decision of this appeal. The learned senior counsel Shri S.B. Sanyal appearing for the respondents very fairly placed the case of both the parties and invited our attention to the order passed by this Court on 2.9.1998. At a stage when only notice was issued to the opposite party on the special leave petition, this Court on 2.9.1998 recorded in its order the statement made on behalf of the appellants thus:-

'Learned senior counsel for the petitioners states on instructions that the petitioners will have no objection to the contesting respondents drawing any quantity of water from this disputed water course at any time for any number of years subject to only one rider that the respondents may formally accept the ownership of the said water course as belonging to the petitioners. On this statement learned counsel for the contesting respondents seeks eight weeks' time to take instructions. Adjourned for eight weeks.'
14. The case, thereafter, went on being adjourned awaiting instructions in response to proposals made on behalf of the appellants. It appears that no instructions on the proposal made on behalf of the appellants were received by the counsel appearing for the respondents and therefore, after granting leave, this appeal was directed to be listed for hearing by order made on 6.4.1999.

15. Even at the time of hearing of the matter finally by us, the learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents has stated that on the proposal made by the appellants, no instructions have been received. We have already mentioned above that the learned counsel appearing for the appellants also was unable to assist this Court for want of instructions. The plight of tribals and villagers living in remote corner of North-East States of Nagaland can well be realised as access to this Court is extremely difficult for them. We, therefore, proceed to decide the case on the basis of evidence and material on record.

16. After perusing the record of the case and the rules which constitute special forums and recognize customary law applicable to the residents of the hill districts of the State of Nagaland, we find that there are flaws in the order of learned single judge both in procedure and merit.

17. We have mentioned above the nature of the rules containing substantive and procedural law applicable to the villages of the hill districts of Nagaland. Neither the Civil Procedure Code nor the Evidence Act is applicable in adjudicating the disputes of people living in the hill districts. Akin to their traditional fora village Dobhasis court and district village courts have been constituted to decide disputes on the basis of customs of the villages. The procedure indicated is not at all formal. At the time when the dispute with regard to the water source was raised, the rules did not contain any requirement of strict adherence to law of pleadings as contained in the Code of Civil Procedure. It is only in 1989 that the rules were amended to provide some law of pleadings although not as rigid and strict as is contained in the Code of Civil Procedure.

18. In view of the peculiar substantive and procedural law as contained in the rules applicable to hill districts of Nagaland, the village disputes, particularly with regard to the source of water and the land in which it is situated, was required to be decided not as an adversarial litigation but as a subject matter requiring solution in a spirit of accommodation and adjustment of conflicting rights of the members of two contesting clans. In the village courts customary law is required to be applied and the adjudicatory process requires of the adjudicating forums to make all possible efforts to resolve the dispute by mutual agreement and achieve a consensus. The disputes in villages like the one involved in the present case regarding access to the source of water and right and title to the land in which the source exists, needed a resolution so as to best serve the demands of all members of the two village communities who had raised the dispute. Villagers in disputes arising inter se between them concerning exercise of community rights to natural resources like land and water can never feel satisfied by a mere formal decision of such disputes in favour of one or the other party. Instead of decision they need a satisfactory solution of such disputes for their mutual benefits.

19. In adopting a course of remitting the issue of ownership of land in which the water source exists, the High Court has deprived the village court as the primary court to make an effort to resolve the dispute between the two clans of the two villages amicably and on consensus. It is to be noted that under the rule 55, against decision of village court, appeal is provided to the district customary court. It is after the appellate authority decides the dispute that the matter can be brought to the High Court by way of an appeal by the aggrieved party.

20. The learned single judge of the High Court by remitting the issue of ownership to the district customary court for recording evidence on the additional issue and deciding the case on such evidence has virtually acted like the original court. As the dispute is first required to be handled in the spirit of co-operation with all efforts to arrive at a consensus in the village court, the procedure adopted by the High Court in deciding the issue of ownership of the land as the original court was not in accordance with the rules which provide a less formal procedure and application of customary law. The issue about the ownership of land in which the water source exists, if at all, was found to be important, should have been allowed to be raised in the primary court i.e. the village court and then, if necessary agitated before the district court through an appeal. Undertaking exercise of deciding the said dispute of ownership of the land by the High Court for the first time in appeal was not in accordance with the letter and spirit of the rules.

21. The other flaw that we find in the impugned judgment of the High Court is that at the time when it remitted the matter to the district village court for recording evidence on the additional issue of ownership, the rules stood amended providing for filing of pleadings by the parties. In the order remitting the additional issues for recording evidence, the learned judge of the High Court did not allow the parties to file fresh pleadings in relation to the additional issue remitted. This resulted in serious prejudice to the case of the appellants because one of the grounds on which the issue of ownership has been decided against them is that they have not controverted the claim of ownership of the respondents in their written statements filed in response to the appeal preferred by the opposite party before the district village court.

22. For the aforesaid reason, in our opinion, the decision of the High Court on the additional issue of ownership of the land in dispute deserves to be set aside.

23. As we have noted above, during the pendency of this appeal, the counsel of the appellants have expressed no objection to the respondents representing the other village from drawing water from the source situate in the disputed land on the condition that the respondents representing the other village should acknowledge the ownership of the said water course of the appellants. On such a statement made and recorded in the order of this Court, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, despite being granted repeated time gave no response. Eventually, therefore this Court granted leave and entertained this appeal. For want of easy means of communication from the clients we can well realize the helplessness of the counsel representing tribal and village population residing in such remote corners of the country. As we have stated above, the disputes of village community particularly relating to access to land having water source is not a traditional civil litigation as is handled by ordinary civil courts under the Code of Civil Procedure. These are disputes to be dealt with and handled only on the basis of customs of the village communities and through a very informal procedure contained in the Rules. So far as natural resources like land and water are concerned dispute of ownership is not very relevant because undoubtedly the State is the sovereign dominant owner.

24. In the aforesaid circumstances and in view of the peculiar nature of the subject matter of dispute which needed decision on customary law applicable to the parties, we do not think it necessary to again allow the parties to litigate the issue of ownership of the land. In the situation obtaining before us, where both the learned counsel appearing on either side have no latest information and instructions on the subject matter of the dispute and keeping in view long passage of time, in our considered opinion this appeal can be disposed of by declaring that the village communities in two clans of two villages would have a joint and equal right to the water source in the disputed land. None of the members of the two contesting clans or communities in the two villages shall restrict access to any one of the two village communities to the common water source. After setting aside the order of the High Court and its decision on dispute of ownership of the land measuring two acres, we leave the dispute of ownership open for being raised by any of the contesting parties, if a cause of action for the same arises in future, in the competent village court for its resolutions in accordance with the provisions of the rules. We, however, hope that such conflict or cause of action would never arise and without raising the dispute of ownership of the land, the two village communities will peacefully and in orderly manner regulate their rights of drawing water from the source for their common benefit.

25. In the result the appeal partly succeeds. The impugned order of the High Court is set aside by substituting the directions made above. Keeping in view the status of the parties and the nature of the dispute, we make no order as to costs in this appeal.

**********
HEADNOTE
Arbitration
Arbitration Act, 1940
Sections 14 ,20 and 31 -Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 - Section 20 Arbitration award -Application for making the award a rule of the court - Territorial jurisdiction of the court - Determination - Agreement between appellant and respondent with regard to development of certain land and construction there on- Land located in New Delhi - Owner of the land residing in Faridabad, Haryana - Developer company having its registered office in New Delhi - Disputes between the parties - Arbitrator making an award notwithstanding the pendency of the application under Section 20 made by the appellant land owner in the High Court - Respondent developer making an application under Section 14 in the Faridabad court for making the award the rule of the court -Whether the said court has the juris-diction to entertain the application and make the award a rule of the court. Held Section 20 of CPC is attracted and since the appellant resided at Faridabad and the dispute involved rendition of accounts, the court at Faridabad had the jurisdiction to entertain the application under Section 14 to make the award the rule of the court.
HELD
We are of the view that at the relevant time the appellant resided at Faridabad. He resided at Faridabad when the contract was made. Under the contract, the parties agreed to refer all disputes to the Faridabad court. Apart from the residence, we are also concerned with the place of accrual of the cause of action. In the present case, a bare reading of the agreement indicates that it is an agreement to develop. The appellant remains the owner, the Developer remains the contractor. The Developer is the financer. The appellant is the owner of an asset. The contractor/ Developer agrees to exploit that asset on behalf of the owner. The Developer funds the scheme. The building plans remained in the name of the owner. The D.D.A. informs the owner regarding revocation of the building plan. The owner files the writ petition challenging the revocation. The contractor is paid consideration in terms of a part of the property. In the circumstances, it cannot be said that this case is similar to a suit for land. One cannot look at para 16 alone in isolation. On the other hand, with open eyes, theparties had entered into the contract, they had agreed to refer all disputes to an arbitrator at Faridabad and they had agreed that the Faridabad court alone shall have jurisdiction. In a matter of this kind, it can- not be said that the claim is similar to a suit for land. A housing complex has to be constructed at the site. When dispute arises, it will not be confined only to immovable property. Such disputes also require accounts to be maintained. The disputes also involve rendition of accounts. In the circumstances, in our view, section 20 CPC alone is attracted. Therefore, in our view, the High Court was right in holding that the Faridabad court had jurisdiction to make the Award the rule of the court. (Para 16)

Arbitration Act, 1940
Sections 8 , 14 to 17 and 20 - Arbitration - Ex parte award - Validity - Distinction and applicability of Sections 8 and 20 - Reference made to Arbitrator on 24-8-1992 - On the date fixed for hearing arbitrator not entering presence - However award made after fourteen months that too after one party moved an application under Section 20 in the High Court - Trial court making the award rule of the court by an ex parte order - Validity. Without going into the merits held that the order of the trial court was not sustainable. Matter accordingly directed to be restored to file of the trial court for re-examination as to whether the award given by the arbitrator should or should not be made rule of the court.
HELD
We have also gone through the Award. We do not wish to express any opinion on the merits, however, the fact remains that the arbitrator entered upon the reference on 24.8.1992. He fixed 06 passed by the trial court at Faridabad making Award dated 29.3.1994 the rule of the court. Consequently, we direct restoration of the matter to the file of the Court of Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Faridabad in Case No. 7 instituted on 12.4.1994 titled M/s Chopra Land Developers Pvt. Ltd. v. Jatinder Nath and Anr.. We may clarify that the trial court will proceed on the basis that it has territorial jurisdiction to decide the application made by the Developer under sections 14 to 17 of the Act. The said application will be decided on merits alone in accordance with law. In other words, the trial court will re-examine the question on merits as to whether the Award given by the arbitrator on 29.3.1994 should or should not be made the rule of the court. The trial court will have to decide whether to extend the period for making the Award or not, whether to supercede the reference or not. The trial court will proceed in accordance with law. Any observation on the merits of the case mentioned hereinabove shall not be treated as opinion of this Court. Further, the trial court will proceed on the basis that it has territorial jurisdiction to decide the above matter. (Para 17)

CASES REFERRED
1. Deena v. Bharat Singh [JT 2002 (5) SC 359] (Para 10)

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.



1. Leave granted.



2. Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a learned Single Judge of the Rajasthan High Court at Jaipur. By the impugned order the High Court dismissed the revision petition, filed by the appellant, and imposed cost of Rs.5,000/- to be paid personally by the Commercial Tax Officer, Anti

Evasion, Bharatpur who passed the assessment order dated 14.9.2001.



3. Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:



3.1. Penalty under Section 78(5) of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act') was imposed on the respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 'assessee') on the ground that at the time of checking of vehicle on 7.9.2001, the documents produced showed that bill No.155 dated 29.9.2000 of M/s. George Fischer Disa Limited, Satyamangala Industrial Area, Tumkur, Karnataka raised on the respondent-assessee M/s. Amtek India Ltd., Biwadi along with delivery challan No.

5259 dated 3.9.2001 form No. ST-18A in which invoice No.155 was also mentioned and form No.ST -39 prescribed under Karnataka Sales Tax Act and bilty of North Eastern Carrying Corporation accompanying the said goods were produced for verification. However, date of  the said invoice No.155 dated 16.2.2000, was held to be of an earlier point of time than the date mentioned in the delivery challan of 3.9.2001. Therefore, the Assessing Authority held that said document was doubtful and there was non-compliance with Section 78(2)(a) of the Act, and imposed the penalty of Rs.1,36,200/- @ 30% of value of goods on the respondent-assessee, the consignee or purchaser.



3.2. According to the assessee, plant and machinery and equipments purchased by respondent-assessee from the consignor though purchased under invoice No.155 dated 16.2.2000 in which due excise duty and Central Sales Tax @ 4% against C-Form was charged by the seller, but the goods were consigned and received after the lapse of about one year.



3.3. But that cannot mean that invoice raised by seller-company was not genuine and, therefore, the penalty was not justified.



3.4. Both the Appellate Authorities i.e. D.C. (Appeals) as well as Tax Board found the said explanation of the assessee satisfactory and correct and, therefore, set aside the penalty under Section 78(5) of the Act. The revenue filed a revision petition before the High Court under Section 86 of the Act on the supposed question of law arising in the matter. The High Court found that as a matter of fact none arises.



3.5. In the Revision Petition filed, the correctness of views expressed by the Appellate Authority i.e. the DC (Appeals) and the Tax Board were questioned. The High Court found that all relevant documents were produced, the declarations issued by the Sales Tax Authorities of both the States clearly established that transit and transactions were perfectly genuine and there was no reason for the Assessing Authority to hold the document to be non-genuine so as to attract levy of penalty at the rate of 30% of the value of goods under Section 38(5) of the Act. The High Court felt that the action of the authorities cannot be countenanced and they cannot take the plea of good faith. The alleged good faith was not established and on the contrary the action clearly indicated that the assessing officer was bent upon levying the demand overlooking the genuine documents. Accordingly, the revision petition was dismissed and costs were imposed.

4. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that an error of judgment should not be treated as a mala fide action so as to warrant the severe criticism as done by the High Court and also to warrant imposition of cost.



5. There is no appearance on behalf of the respondent in spite of notice.



6. Whether an act has been done in good faith would depend upon the factual scenario. In order to establish "good faith", it has to be established that what has been imputed concerning the person claiming it to be so, is true.



7. "Good Faith" according to the definition in Section 3(22) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 means a thing, which is in fact done honestly whether it is done negligently or not.



8. Anything done with due care and attention, which is not mala fide is presumed to have been done in 'good faith'.



9. "Good Faith" is defined under Section 2(h) of the Limitation Act, as 'good faith'- nothing shall be deemed to be done in good faith which is not done with due care and attention"



10. Dealing with a case under the Indian Limitation Act, 1963, this Court held that the expression 'good faith' as used in Section 14 means "exercise of due care and attention". In the context of Section 14, the expression 'good faith' qualifies prosecuting the proceeding in the court, which ultimately is found to have no jurisdiction. The finding as to good faith or the absence of it is a finding of fact. [See Deena v. Bharat Singh1]



11. Section 52 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short 'IPC') emphasizes due care and attention in relation to "good faith".



12. In this case though the action of the concerned assessing officer, in overlooking the documents produced coming to the conclusion about manipulation appears to be totally uncalled for and without any reasonable basis. This is a case where the officer should have been more careful and should not have acted in a manner as if he was a bloodhound and not a watchdog of revenue. It is unfortunate that in large number of cases, orders totally bereft of rationality are being passed. They do not in any manner serve public interest, much less the interest of revenue.



13. Therefore, while holding that the action of the Assessing Authority was clearly unjustified, we direct deletion of the direction for imposition of cost. We, however, make it clear that in future if any such action comes to the notice of the Courts/Authorities, appropriate action shall be taken in accordance with law and the observations made in this case about lack of bona fide shall also be a factor to be taken note of.


**********
CROSS CITATION
1968 SCR (2) 661

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 454 of 1965. Appealfrom the Judgment and order October 7, 1963 of the Rajasthan High Court in D. B. Civil Writ Petition No. 482 of 1962. M. C. Chagla, K. B. Mehta and Indu Soni, for the appellants.

R. K. Garg, D. P. Singh, S. C. Agarwala, Shivpujan Singh and Anil Kumar Gupta, for the respondents.

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

Ramaswami, J. This appeal is brought, by certificate,from the judgment of the Rajasthan High Court dated October 7, 1963 in D. B. Civil Writ Petition no. 482 of 1962. By its judgment the High Court allowed the Writ Petition filed by the respondents and quashed the orders of the Board of Revenue datedJuly 24, 1959, April 8, 1960 and July 16, 1962. The jagir of respondent no. 1, Rao Bal Deo Singh was resumed with effect from August 15, 1954 under the provisions of the 663 Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagirs Act,1952 (Act no. VI of 1952), hereinafter referred to as the 'Act'. A notice was issued by the Collector, Bikaner to respondent no. 1, on August 23, 1954 asking him to hand over the charge of the jagir but respondent no. 1 did not comply with the notice as he had filed a writ application in the High Court challenging the validity of the Act. A subsequent notice was issued to respondent no. 1, by the Collector on May 14, 1955 directing him to hand over charge of the jagir. Respondent no. 1 actually handed over charge of the jagir on September 27, 1955 and at the same time submitted alist of his private properties under s. 23 of the Act. In the said list was included 5490 bighas and odd ofagricultural land in villages Mirgarh, Anandgarh and Rawla in Ganganagar district and Anupgarh in Bikaner district which respondent no. 1claimed as his khudkasht land.On March 18,1957 respondent no.1 madean application to the Tahsildar, Anupgarh to correct entries in the revenue records and to show the area claimed by him as his khudkasht land. After an enquiry the Tahsildar, Anupgarh forwarded the application to the Assistant Collector, Ganganagar recommending the correction of the entries as prayed for by respondent no. 1. The Assistant Collector forwarded the papers to the Collector, Ganganagarwho recommended to the, Divisional Commissioner, Bikaner that the correction of entries may be made.By his order dated November 30, 1958 the Divisional Commissioner, Bikaneraccorded sanction and directed the Collector to enter the disputed lands in the revenue records as khudkasht lands of respondent no. 1. On appeal to the Board of Revenue the case was remanded to the Divisional Commissioner on July24, 1959 with a direction that he shouldrefer the matter to the Jagir Commissioner andtill his decision was received the entries in the revenue record shouldnot be altered. It appears that the record of the case was transmitted for compliance to the Sub-Divisional Officer, Raisinghnagar by the office of the Commissioner of Bikaner, who,after making an enquiry, submitted his recommendation to the Jagir Commissioner instead of sending it to the Divisional Commissioner to correct the relevant entries. Meanwhile, the Director of Colonisation came to know of the proceedings which were going on and therefore he addressed a letter on December 22, 1958 to the Divisional Commissioner, Bikaner to review his order dated November 30, 1958 and requested him to refer the matter to the Jagir Commissioner who wasthe only competent authority to determine the nature of the disputed property under s. 23(2) of the Act. On receipt of the said letter the Divisional Commissioner reviewedhis previous order of November 30, 1958 and ultimately dismissed the objections of Director of Colonisation on March 5, 1959. It appears that the Additional Jagir Commissioner after receiving the papers from the Sub-Divisional Officer, Raisinghnagar also decided the matter on 664 October 5, 1959 holding that the disputed land should be treated as the personal property ofthe ex-Jagirdar of Sattasar. The State of Rajasthan preferred appeals to the Board of Revenue against the orders of the Commissioner, Bikaner datedMarch 5, 1959 and against the order of the Additional Jagir Commissioner dated October 5, 1959. By its judgment dated July 24, 1959 the Board of Revenue set aside the order of the Commissioner of Bikaner and directed him to decidethe case after referring the matter to the Jagir Commissioner for determining the nature of the property under s. 23(2) of the Act. By its order dated April 8, 1960 the Board of Revenue quashed the order of the Additional Jagir Commissioner and remanded the case to him with the direction that he should dispose of the matter after proper enquiry in accordance with the provisions of the Rules framed under the Act. Respondent no. 1 preferred a review against the order of the Board of Revenue dated April 8, 1960 but the review petition was dismissed by the Board of Revenue on July 16, 1962. Respondent no. 1 thereafter moved the High Court of Rajasthan for the grant of a writ under Art. 226 of the Constitution. By its judgment dated October 7, 1963 the Rajasthan High Court allowed the Writ Petition and quashed the orders of the Board of Revenue datedJuly 24, 1959, April 8, 1960 and July 16, 1962, holding that no enquiry under s. 23(2) of the Act was necessary in thecase and the matter required to be disposed in accordancewith the procedure laid down in the Rajasthan Land RevenueAct, 1956 (Act. no. 15 of 1956) regarding the correction of entries. The High Court accordingly directed that the Board of Revenue may either itself dispose the appeal if no further material was required for the purpose or maypass such orders which the circumstancesrequired for final disposal of the case.

It is necessary at this stage to set out the provisions of the relevant statutes. On February 13, 1952 the Rajasthan Legislature enacted the Act to provide for the resumption of jagir lands.Under s. 21 of the Act the Government of Rajasthan was empowered to issue a notification appointing a date for the resumption of any class of jagir lands and under s. 22 of the Act the right, title and interest of the Jagirdar in his jagir lands stood resumed to the Government free from all encumbrances as from the date of resumption notified under s. 21. Section 23 of the Act, however, provided that the khudkasht lands of the jagirdar shall be continued to be held by the jagirdar. Section 23 states

"23. Private lands, buildings, wells, house

sites and enclosures.-(1) Notwithstanding

anythingcontained in the last preceding

section-

(a) Khudkasht lands of a Jagirdar;

6 6 5

(b) (i) all open enclosures used for

agricultural. or domestic purposes and in his

continuous possession (which including

possession of any predecessor-in-interest) for

six years immediately before the date of

resumption;

(ii)

(iii) all private buildings, places of

worship,and wells situated in, and trees

standing on lands, included in such enclosures

or house-sites, as are specified in clause (i)

above, or land appertaining to such buildings

or places of -worship;

(iv) all groves and fruit trees wherever

situate, belonging to or held by the Jagirdar

or any other person;

(c) all private wells and buildings

belonging to or held bythe Jagirdar or any

other person;

(d) all tanks in the personal occupation of

the Jagirdar and not used for irrigating the

lands of any tenant in the jagir land;

shall continue to belong to or be held by such

Jagirdar or other person:

(2) Ifany question arises whether any

property is of the nature referred to insub-

section (1), it shall be referred to the Jagir

Commissioner, who may,after holding the

prescribed enquiry, make such order thereon as

he deems fit."

Section 2(i)defines 'Khudkasht' to mean "anyland cultivated personally by a jagirdar and includes : (i) any land recordedas khudkasht, Sir, or Hawala in settlement records; and (ii) any land allotted to aJagirdar as khudkasht under Chapter IV". Section 37 reads as follows :

"37. Question of title.-(1) If in the course

of a proceeding under this Act any question

relatingto title, right or interest in any

jagir land, other than a question as to any

khudkasht land or the correctness or otherwise

of any entry relating thereto in settlement

records or as to any boundary,map, field-

book, record of rights or annual register or

as to any Wazib-ul-arz or Dasturganwai or any

other settlement paper lawfully prepared or as

to the correctness or otherwise of any entry

made

666

therein or a question referred to in section 3

of the Rajasthan Jagir Decisions and

Proceedings (Validation) Act, 1955, arises and

the question so arising has not alreadybeen

determined by a competent authority, the Jagir

Commissioner shall proceed to make an inquiry

into the merits of the question so arising and

pass such orders thereon as he deems fit.

(2) Every question referred to in section 3

of the Rajasthan Jagir Decision and

Proceedings (Validation) Act, 1955 shall be

inquired into and decided by a revenue officer

or court declared by the provisions of the

said Act competent to do so.

(3) Every other question excluded bysub-

section

(1) from the jurisdiction of the Jagir

Commissioner shall beinquired into and

decidedby a revenueofficer or court

competent to do so under the provisions of the

Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 or the Rules

made thereunder.

(4) Ifany such question as is referred to

in subsections (2) and (3) arises in the

course of a proceeding under this Act, the

Jagir Commissioner shall refer it for inquiry

and decision of the court competent to do so

and shall be bound by, and act according to

such decision."

Section 46 provides

"Bar of Jurisdiction.-( 1) Save as otherwise

providedin this Act, no Civil or Revenue

Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of

any matter which is required tobe settled,

decided or dealt withby any officer or

authority under this Act.

(2) Noorder made by any such officer or

authority under this Act shall be called in

question in any Court."

Section 47 states :

"Act to override other laws.-Save as otherwise

expressly provided in this Act, the provisions

of this Act and of the rules and ordersmade

thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding

any thing therein contained being inconsistent

with any existing Jagir law or any other law

for the time being in force."

Rules 22, 23, 24, 26 and 28 of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagir Rules, 1954 are to the following effect :

:22. Submission oflist of personal

properties by Jagirdars.-(1) The Jagirdar

shall submit to the officers taking oversuch

charge a list of the properties which he

667

claims as his private and personal properties

under subsection (1) of section 23 of the Act.

(2) Copies ofsuch list shall be annexed

with the

reports submitted under rule 21 of sub-rule

(3).

(3) Ifthe officer taking over such charge

is of the

opinion that any item of property included in

the list submitted under sub-rule (1) is not

the property which the jagirdar is entitled to

hold under sub-section (1) of section 23 of

the Act, he shall record reasons forsuch

opinion and refer the matter to the Jagir

Commissioner under sub-section (2) of section

23 of the Act. While making the report under

rule 21, sub-rule (3), a copy ofsuch

reference shall be forwarded to the Government

as well as to the Collector of the District in

which the property in dispute is situated :

Providedthat where the officer deputed to

take over charge of a jagir is below therank

of Tehsildar he shall submit his opinion to

the Tehsildar concerned who shall refer the

same with his opinion to the Jagir

Commissioner.

(4) A copy of such list shall also be

affixed on the notice board of the Tehsil

concerned, and the Municipal Board or Village

Panchayat concerned shall be informedthat

they may see the list in the Tehsil and submit

their objections, if any, to the inclusion of

any property or part of it in the list to the

Tehsildar within a specified time.

(5) The Tehsildar may extend thetime

specified by him under sub-rule (4), if he is

satisfied that there are sufficient grounds

for doing so and shall submit the objections

received from the Municipal Board or thePan-

chayat with his opinion to the Jagir

Commissioner through the Collector."

"23. Inquiry by Jagir Commissioner in the

matter of personal properties.-(1)Upon

receiptof a reference under thelast

preceding rule, or where he decides to review

the list on his own motion, the Jagir Commis-

sioner shall appoint a date for holding an

inquiry into the matter.Such date shall not

be less than two months from the date of the

order and a public notice thereof shall be

issued within a week of such order.

(2) Instead of holding the enquiry himself

under sub-rule (1) the Jagir Commissioner may

entrust the enquiry to any officer not below

the rank of an Assistant Jagir Commissioner or

Sub-Divisional Officer."

668

"24. Notice how to be served. (1) The notice

given under rule 23 shall be served on the

Jagirdarconcerned, the Revenue Secretary to

the Government and the Collector of the

districtin which the property in dispute is

situatedin the manner provided for the

service of summons on a defendant in asuit

under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

(2) Copies of the notice shall be sent to

the Tehsildar

within whose jurisdiction the property in

dispute is

situated :-

(a) for being proclaimed by beat of drum to

the

inhabitants ofthe localitywheresuch

property is situated;

(b) for being exhibited at some conspicuous

place in such locality; and

(c) for beingposted, thereafter on the

notice board of the Tehsil."

"26. Who may contest.-(1) The State shall be

represented at such inquiry by the Collector

or any other Officer not below the rank of a

Naib Tehsildar as the Collector may by order

in writing appoint in that behalf.

(2) Ifany inhabitants of thelocality in

which the property in dispute is situated are

in any manner interested therein, they may

contest the claim of the Jagirdar in respect

thereof and may jointly appoint one ormore

persons not exceeding three in number to

represent them at such inquiry."

"28. Mode of inquiryregarding personal

properties.-The Jagir Commissioner or the

officer holding the inquiry shall allow the

Jagirdar, the State and the inhabitants of the

locality desiring to contest the claim of the

Jagirdarreasonable opportunity to prove or

disprovetheir respective contentions. The

enquiry shall be held in the manner provided

for the trial of a suit by a Revenue Court,

and where the enquiry has been held by any

officer other than the Jagir Commissioner such

officer shall submit the record with a report

of his findings to the Jagir Commissioner for

his orders."

Section 122 of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 provides -as follows :

"122. Attestation of entries and decision of

disputes -All undisputed entries in the record

of rights shall be attested bythe parties

interested, and all disputes

669

regarding such entries, whether taken up by

the Land Records Officer of his own motion or

upon application by any party interested,

shall be disposed of by him in accordance with

the provisions of sections 123, 124 and 125."

Section 125 is to the following effect

"125. Settlement of disputes as to entries in

record of rights.-(1) All other disputes

regarding entries on the record of rights

shall be decided on the basis of possession.

(2) Ifin the course of inquiry into a

dispute under this section the Land Records

Officer is unable to satisfy himself as to

which party is in possession, he shall as-

certain by summary enquiry who is the person

best entitled to possession and shall decide

the dispute accordingly.

(3) Noorder as to possession passed under

this section shall debar anypersonfrom

establishing his right to the property in any

civil or revenue court having jurisdiction."

Section 136 reads

"136. Decisionof disputes.-All disputes

respecting the class or tenure of any tenant

or regarding the rent or revenue payable or

regarding entries in the annual registers

shall be decided in accordance with the provi-

sions of section 123 or section 124 or section

125, as the case may be."

On behalf of the appellants Mr. M. C. Chagla put forward the argument that the High Court erred in law in holdingthat the dispute in the present case merely related to the correction ofentries envisaged in ss. 122 to 125 of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 and as suchthe Revenue Authorities were competent to ordercorrection ofsuch entries. It was submitted that the question as to whether the land claimed by respondent No.1was khudkashtland withinthe meaning of s. 23(1)(a) read with s. 2(i) of the Act was a matter which the Jagir Commissionalone could determine under s. 23(2) of the Act and the jurisdiction of other authorities was completely barred. The argument was stressed that the disputebetween the parties was essentially adispute relating to the character of the properties claimed to be khudkasht by respondent No. 1 and therefore the Jagir Commissioner had the exclusive jurisdiction to determine that question under s. 23(2) of the Act. It is true that respondent No. 1 had applied for correction ofentries in the revenue records but the correction ofrevenue records really depended upon the deter-670 mination of the character of the disputed property and unless it was held by competent authority under the Act that the property was khudkasht land of the Jagirdar the application of respondent no. 1 for the correction of the revenue entries could not be decided by the Revenue Authorities under the provisions ofthe RajasthanLand Revenue Act.To put it differently, the argument of the appellants was that the real question that arose for determination was whether the disputed land was khudkasbt under s. 23(1) of the Act and by taking recourse to the provisions of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act respondent no. I could not oust the jurisdiction of the JagirCommissioner for determination ofthe dispute. In ouropinion the argument put forward by Mr. M. C. Chagla on behalf of the appellants is well-founded and must be accepted 'is correct. The dispute in this case is essentially as to the character of the property claimed by respondent no. 1 as khudkasht and falls directly within the purview of S. 23 of the Act and therefore the Jagir Commissioner is the exclusive authority to hold enquiry into the dispute and give a decision thereon. The language of s. 23 of the Act is peremptory in character andthe section requires that if any question arises whether any property is of the nature referred to in sub-s. (1), it shall be referred to the Jagir Commissioner, who may, after holding the prescribed enquiry, makesuch order thereonas he deems fit. Section 46of the Act relates to bar of jurisdiction and states that no Civil or Revenue Courtshall have jurisdiction in respect of any matterwhich is required to be settled, decided or dealt with by any officer or authority under the Act. The section makes furtherprovision that no order made by anysuch officer or authorityunder the Act shall be called in question in any Court.Section 47 expressly states that the provisions ofthe Act and of the rules andordersmade thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything therein contained being inconsistent with any existing Jagir law or any other law for the time being in force. Reading S. 23 of the Act in the context of ss. 46 and 47 of the Act it is manifest that an exclusive jurisdiction is conferred upon the Jagir Commissioner to decide the question as to whether any property of the Jagirdar is of the nature of khudkasht and the decision of the Jagir Commissioner on this question is final and cannot be challenged collaterally in a Civil or Revenue Court. It is true that ss. 125 and 136 of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act confer power on theLand Records Officer to decide disputes with regard to the entries in the record of rights or in the annual registers, as the case may be. But neither the Land Records Officer nor any other Revenue Courts contemplated by the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act have jurisdiction to enquire into the question whether the property claimed by theJagirdar is khudkasht within themeaning of S. 23 of the Act. The reason is that the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of JagirsAct, 1952 is a special Act and the general maxim is that a subsequent Gene-671 ral Act does not affect a prior special Act by implication.-Generaliaspecialibus non derogant.-"When the legislature has given its attention to a separate subject and made provision for it, the presumption is that a subsequent general enactment is not intended to interfere with the special provision unless it manifests that intention very clearly. Each enactment must be construed in that respect according to its own subject-matter and its own terms." (Barker v. Edger) (1). We are accordingly of the opinion that an enquiry under S. 23(2) of the Act was necessary in this case and that the Board ofRevenue was right in taking the view that the matter should be referred to the Jagir Commissioner for determining the nature of the property under S. 23(2) of the Act and only after his decision is received should the Commissioner, Bikanertake up the question with regard to the correction of entries under the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act. We consider that the order of the Board of Revenue dated July 24, 1959 is based on a correct interpretation of the law and the High Court of Rajasthan was in error in setting aside that order. On behalf of the respondents it was contended that s. 23 of the Act must be read along with s. 37 and since the Jagir Commissioner is not given any authority under s. 37 tomake any enquiry with regard to the khudkasht land of the Jagirdar it must be held that under s. 23 of the Actalso the Jagir Commissioner had no jurisdiction to make such an enquiry. In our opinion, there is no justification for this argument. In our view, s. 23 of the Act is independent of s. 37 of the Act as it deals with an enquiry of the nature of the property mentioned in s. 23(1), and it has nothing to do with the question of determining the right, title or interest of the Jagirdar in the land. Having regard to the schemeand purpose of the Act it is manifestthat s. 23 empowers the Jagir Commissioner to determine the character of the properties claimed by the Jagirdar as kliudkasht for determination of the compensation to be paid and determining other questions which are incidental to the resumption of the jagir land. On the other hand, s. 37 of the Act deals with questions of disputed titles and with regard to such a question the section makes a provision for enquiry either by the Jagir Commissioner or by a revenue authority under the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956. It is manifest that the scope of s. 37 is quite different from that of s. 23 and the nature of the enquiry contemplated by the two sectionsalso is different. As we have already pointed out, the question arising in the present case falls directly within the ambit of S. 23 of the Act and the Jagir Commissioner alone has the exclusive jurisdiction to determine that question. It was objected on behalf of the respondents that, in any case, the question cannot be determined by the Jagir Commissioner after

(1) [1898] A.C. 748. 672 the resumption proceedings had come to an end.It wassaid that after the proceedings for resumption were completed under the Act and award of compensation has been made, there is no jurisdiction left in the Jagir Commissioner to proceed with an enquiry under S. 23(2) of the Act. For the purpose of this caseit is not necessary for us toexpress any opinion as to whether the Jagir Commissioner has jurisdiction to make an enquiry under S. 23(2) of the Act after the proceedings for resumption have come to a close. It appears that in the present case theDirector of Colonisation addressed a letter to the Divisional Commissioner, Bikaner on December 22, 1958 for review of his order dated November 30, 1958 and that he also requested that the matter should be referred to the Jagir Commissioner as hewas the only competent authority to determine the natureof the disputed property under S. 23(2) of theAct. On receipt of this letter the Divisional Commissioner, Bikaner reviewed his previous order of November 30, 1958 and dismissed theobjections of Directorof Colonisation on March 5, 1959.It is admitted that the final award was made by the Additional Jagir Commissioner with regard to compensation on January 20, 1959. We shall assume in favour of the respondents that the proceedings for resumptioncame to a close on January 20, 1959. Even on that assumption the dispute was raised by the Directorof Colonisation on December 22, 1958, long before the date of the final award on January 20, 1959 and the Jagir Commissioner had jurisdiction to proceed with the enquiry under S. 23(2) of the Act since the proceedings for resumption were still pending. We are accordingly of the opinion that Counsel for the respondents is unable to make good his argument onthis aspect of the case.

We proceed to consider the next question arising inthis case, viz. whether the High Court was in error in setting aside the orders of the Board of Revenue dated April 8, 1960 and July 16, 1962. The Board of Revenue haspointed out that the decision of the Additional Jagir Commissioner dated October 5, 1959 was illegal since he did not follow the procedure contemplated by Rules 23 and 26 of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagir Rules,1954 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules'). It appearsthat by its previous order dated July 24, 1959 the Board of Revenue had set aside theordersof the Divisional Commissioner dated November 30, 1958 and March 5, 1959 and the matter was remanded to him with the direction to refer the matter to the Jagir Commissioner and till the decision of the JagirCommissioner was received entries in the records should stand as they stood prior to the impugned orders. In compliance with this decision the record was transmitted to the Sub-Divisional Officer, Ganganagar by the office of the Commissioner, Bikaner who in turn sent them on August24, 1959 to the Sub-Divisional Officer, Raisinghnagar. The letter reached the Sub-Divisional Officer, Raisingh-673 nagar on August 29, 1959 and on it the Sub-Divisional Officer wrotedown the following order: "Received today, informthe parties to appear before me on 5-9-59" : It appears that on September 5, 1959 Shri Murlidhar andShri Sada Nand appeared before the Sub-Divisional Officer, statements of5 persons were recorded and argumentswere heard and the case was directed to be put up for writing out the report on September 9, 1959. On this date theSubDivisional Officer wrote out the report and forwarded the papers to the Additional Jagir Commissioner. On October 1, 1959, the Additional Jagir Commissioner heard the arguments of the parties and pronounced his decision on October 5, 1959. The Board of Revenue has pointed out that underRule 23 a date not less than 2 months from the date of the order should have been fixed for hearing of the case and published notice should have been served not only on the Jagirdar but also upon the Revenue Secretary to the Government and the Collector of the district. Rule 28 states that the mode of inquiry was that provided for the trial of a suit by a Revenue court.The Sub-Divisional Officerinstead of following the rules fixed the date of hearing within a week of the receipt of the order and within further 5days submitted his report without giving the notices under Rules 23 and 24 and without holding the enquiry in the manner prescribed by Rule 28. The Board of Revenue accordingly set aside the order of the Additional Jagir Commissioner dated October 5, 1959 and remanded the case back to him with the direction that he should hold the enquiry himself or may entrust the enquiry under the provisions of s. 23(2) of the Act to a Subordinate Officer and that the enquiry must be held in either case in accordance with law and thecase shouldbe decided thereafter afresh. In our opinion, the Board of Revenue was right in taking the view that the Additional Jagir Commissioner should have followed theprocedure prescribed by the statutory rules and the High Court had no justification for setting aside the order of the Board of Revenue dated April 8, 1960 and of July 16, 1962. For the reasons expressed we hold that the order of the Rajasthan High Court dated October 7, 1963 quashing the orders of the Board of Revenue dated July 24, 1959, April 8, 1960 and July 16, 1962 should be set aside and CivilWrit Petition No. 482 of 1962 filed by the respondents should be dismissed. We accordingly allow this appeal and set aside the judgment of the Rajasthan High Court dated October 7, 1963, but in the circumstances of the case there will be no order as to costs.

Y.P. Appeal

allowed. 674
**********
HEADNOTE
LAND ACQUISITION

Land Acquisition Act, 1894

Sections 4, 6, 18 and 30 - Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act, 1956 - Sections 2(3) and 3 - Land Acquisition - Compensation for acquisition - Disputes relating to apportionment of compensation - Reference of such disputes by the collector to the decision of court - When permissible - Meaning of 'person interested' within the meaning of section 3(b) - State proceeding to acquire a certain land on the assumption that it belonged to a particular person - Subsequently however state calling in question the award made by the collector and seeking reference under section 30 on the premise that the land did not belong to the person from whom it was purportedly acquired but was a land owned by the state having vested in it consequent upon the abolition of proprietary rights much before the acquisition - Whether state is an 'interested person' within the meaning of section 3(b) - Whether the reference under section 30 maintainable - Allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the division bench and restoring that of the single judge held, state cannot be considered to be an interested person. A dispute as to pre existing right or interest of the state government in the property sought to be acquired is not a dispute capable of being adjudicated upon or referred to the civil court for determination either under section 18 or 30. Therefore the reference was wholly without jurisdiction and therefore all proceedings under section 30 are null. State however not debarred from pursuing such other legal remedy as may be available to it.

HELD


State is not a 'person interested' as defined in section 3(b) of the Act.  It is not a party to the proceedings before the collector in the sense, which the expression 'parties to the litigation' carries.  The collector holds the proceedings and makes an award as a representative of the state government.  Land or an interest in land pre-owned by state cannot be subject matter of acquisition by state. The question of deciding the ownership of State or holding of any interest by the state government in proceedings before the collector cannot arise in proceedings before the collector (as defined in section 3(c) of the Act).  If it was a government land there was no question of initiating the proceedings for acquisition at all.  The government would not acquire the land, which already vests in it.  A dispute as to pre-existing right or interest of the State government in the property sought to be acquired is not a dispute capable of being adjudicated upon or referred to the civil court for determination either under Section 18 or section 30 of the Act.  The reference made by the collector to the court was wholly without jurisdiction and the civil court ought to have refused to entertain the reference and ought to have rejected the same.  All the proceedings under section 30 of the Act beginning from the reference and adjudication thereon by the court suffer from lack of inherent jurisdiction and are therefore a nullity liable to be declared so. (Para 24)



Quashing of the proceedings under section 30 of the Land Acquisition Act would not debar the state from pursuing such other legal remedy before such other forum as may be available to the state government and on the merits and the maintainability thereof we express no opinion herein.  Secondly, the situation in law would have been entirely different if the title of the appellant would have come to an end by any event happening or change taking place after the making of the award by the collector as was the case in Dr. G.H. Grant v. State of Bihar - (1965) 3 SCR 576] (Para 25)

CASES REFERRED
1.Scindia Employees' Union v. State of Maharashtra and Ors. [(1996) 10 SCC 150] (Para 15)


2.State of Maharashtra v. Sant Joginder Singh Kishan Singh and Ors. [1995 Supp (2) SCC 475] (Para 15)


3.Dr. G.H. Grant  v. State of Bihar  [(1965) 3 SCR 576] (Para 11, 25)


4.Kothamasu Kanakarathamma and Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. [AIR 1965 SC 304] (Para 23)


5.Collector of Bombay v. Nusurwanji Rattanji Mistri & Others, AIR 1955 SC 298) (Para 11)


6.Secretary of State v. Sri Narain Khanna [AIR 1942 PC 35] (Para 17)


7.Mohammad Wajeeh Mirza v. Secretary of State for India in Council [AIR 1921 Oudh 31] (Para 20)


8.In the matter of the Land Acquisition Act : Govt. of Bombay v. Esufali Salebhai [34 Bom 618 (at page 636)] (Para 18)


9.Deputy Collector, Calicut Division v. Aiyavu Pillay, 9 Ind Cas 341 (Mad) (Para 19)


10.Nusserwanjee Pestonjee v. Meer Mynoodeen Khan Wullud Meer Sudroodeen Khan Bahadoor [6 Moo Ind App 134] (Para 23)


R.C. LAHOTI, J.

1. The land, which is the subject matter of controversy in these proceedings, is 36.86 acres area out of the total area of 45.92 acres of land of plot nos. 4, 5 and 10 appertaining to khata no. 151 of village Phulsari, district Lohardaga. Notification under section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter 'the Act' for short) was issued on 16.02.1982 for acquiring the said land for the project called Phulsari Sapathi Nala. Declaration under section 6 of the Act was issued on 25.05.1982. Objections under section 9 of the Act were filed by the appellant herein. The state through circle officer, Kuru filed reply to the objections. On 19.02.1986 the collector made an award under section 11 of the Act directing the compensation, as appointed by him, to be paid to Smt. Sharda Devi, the appellant.

2. The relevant facts, which are beyond the pale of controversy at this stage and as would set out briefly the history of litigation, may be noticed. According to the appellant, the said land was Gairmajrua Malik land. It was a part of zamindari estate. Before vesting of zamindari, the land was settled by the ex-landlord in the name of one Deo Narain Prasad by means of a registered deed of settlement dated 24.04.1954. It was a raiyati settlement. The appellant purchased the land from the said Deo Narain Prasad through a registered deed of sale dated 07.09.1962. The appellant has developed the land and kept it under cultivation raising the crops. Her name was mutated in the revenue records by the circle officer. A correction slip was issued to her in her name. The state realized revenue from her from the very date of vesting, i.e. from 1955 till 1975. The rent receipts were exhibited on record.

3. On 18.05.1979, the circle officer issued a notice under section 3 of the Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act, 1956 (Bihar Act XV of 1956) calling upon the appellant to explain why she should not be treated as an encroacher on the land and why her encroachment should not be removed. The notice was issued on the premise that consequent upon vesting of zamindaris, the said land had stood vested in the state of Bihar and was, therefore, 'public land' within the meaning of clause (3) of section 2 of the Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act, 1956. The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court registered as civil writ jurisdiction case no. 366 of 1979 (R), laying challenge to the initiation of such proceedings. The counsel for the state made appearance though a written counter affidavit was not filed. The High Court after hearing both the parties, upheld the plea of the appellant that the said land was gairmajrua malik and not gairmajrua aam land and by virtue of the registered deed of transfer in favour of Deo Narain Prasad, the predecessor-in-title of the appellant, the appellant was justified in claiming that she was raiyat of the land in question and, therefore, could be ejected therefrom only in accordance with the provisions of the Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act. Inasmuch as such ejectment is permissible only on specified grounds, none of which existed in the present case, the notice issued to the appellant was without jurisdiction and liable to be quashed. The High Court by order dated 23.07.1984 allowed the writ petition and directed the proceedings initiated against the appellant under the provisions of the Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act, 1956 to be quashed.

4. In the year 1981, proceedings under section 4(h) of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 proposing to annul the settlement of land in question in favour of Deo Narain Prasad were initiated. The proceedings were founded on the premise that the said settlement was done with the object of defeating the provisions of the Act. An inquiry was held. Once again the appellant filed a writ petition seeking quashing of these proceedings. The petition was registered as CWJC No. 1663 of 1981 (R) and disposed of by the High Court by order dated 25.03.1987.

5. During the pendency of these proceedings, notification under section 4(1) of the Act was published on 16.02.1982 as already stated. It appears that the collector was reluctant to make an award in favour of the appellant determining the quantum of compensation and directing its release to the appellant. On 07.01.1985 the collector (addl. collector, exercising powers of collector) passed an order holding that the land had vested in state and hence no award directing payment of compensation to the appellant was called for. The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court registered as CWJC No. 147 of 1985 (R). By order dated 13.02.1985, the High Court after hearing the learned counsel for the state, directed the writ petition to be allowed. A mandamus was issued to the collector to prepare the award in the name of the appellant. The High Court went on to observe "if there be any dispute thereafter, the matter be referred to the civil court under sections 18 and 30 of the Land Acquisition Act for adjudication of any claim in accordance with law." The order dated 07.01.1985 passed by additional collector, Lohardaga was directed to be quashed. On 19.02.1986, the collector (Land Acquisition) prepared an award in the name of Smt. Sharda Devi directing the amount of compensation as determined by him to be paid to Smt. Sharda Devi, the appellant.

6. On 06.06.1986, much after the expiry of six weeks - the time appointed for seeking a reference to the civil court under section 18 of the Act, the circle officer, Kuru filed an application before the collector seeking a reference to the civil court. It was stated in the application that a dispute existed in between the circle officer, Kuru Anchal (on behalf of the state of Bihar) and Smt. Sharda Devi as to title over the acquired land, which dispute may be referred for adjudication to the civil court under section 30 of the Act. The dispute as to whether the title to the land vests in the appellant, so as to entitle her to payment of compensation or whether the appellant's title had stood already extinguished in view of the land having vested in state was referred under section 30 of the Act to the decisions of the court. The reference was numbered as L.A. Misc. Case No. 42/86 before the civil court. By order dated 06.09.1986 the civil court directed the reference to be rejected. During the course of its order, the learned special subordinate judge, Ranchi, which is the reference court, opined that Smt. Sharda Devi was an occupancy raiyat of the land in question and, therefore, the award prepared in her name was just and legal.

7. By order dated 25.03.1987, the High Court allowed the writ petition filed by the appellant {CWJC 1663 of 1981 (R)} laying challenge to the proceedings initiated under section 4(h) of the Bihar Land Reforms Act. The result of this decision of the High Court is that the effort of the State seeking annulment of settlement and cancellation of the zamabandhi entries standing in the name of the appellant failed. The appellant was held to have acquired the status of raiyat in respect of the land in question.

8. Against the judgment dated 06.09.1986 passed by the learned special subordinate judge, the state Government preferred an appeal to the High Court. A learned single judge of the High Court, by his judgment dated 25.04.1988 affirmed the judgment of Special subordinate judge and directed the appeal to be dismissed. The state filed a letters patent appeal, which came up for hearing before a division bench of the High Court. The division bench framed five questions of law and directed the matter to be placed before the Chief Justice for constituting a full bench to answer the questions. One of the questions framed by the division bench was : "Whether the reference under section 30 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was maintainable at the instance of the state of Bihar ?"

9. The questions of law framed, including the question referred to herein above, were answered against the appellant. As a consequence, the letters patent appeal filed by the state was allowed and the case was remanded to the learned single judge for decision of the case in the light of the observations made by the full bench. Feeling aggrieved by the order of remand, the appellant has preferred this appeal by special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.

10. The sole question which arises for decision in this appeal centres around the question referred to herein above, i.e., whether in the facts and circumstances of the case a reference under section 30 of the Act was competent ? In other words, the core question is - when the state proceeds to acquire land on an assumption that it belongs to a particular person, can the award be called into question by the state seeking a reference under section 30 of the Act on the premise that the land did not belong to the person from whom it was purportedly acquired and was a land owned by the state having vested in it, consequent upon abolition of proprietary rights, much before acquisition ?

11. In order to appreciate the controversy, we will briefly examine the scheme of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, also extracting and reproducing some of the statutory provisions as may be required.

'Person interested' is defined by clause (b) of section 3 as under :-

"the expression 'person interested' includes all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account of the acquisition of land under this Act; and a person shall be deemed to be interested in land if he is interested in an easement affecting the land."

ï¬ Government is not a person interested within the meaning of the above definition (See - Collector of Bombay v. Nusurwanji Rattanji Mistri & Others1). In Dr. G.H. Grant v. State of Bihar2 this Court observed (vide page 584 G): "...............A dispute then arose between the state government and Dr. Grant "as to the persons whom" compensation was payable. The state had no right to the compensation payable for the land under a title existing before the date of the award of the collector, and no application for reference could be made by the state, as a person interested within the meaning of section 18(1)".

ï¬ Whenever it appears to the appropriate government that land in any locality is needed or is likely to be needed for any public purpose etc. a notification to that effect shall be published under section 4 of the Act. Any person interested in any land which has been notified under section 4(1) may prefer objections under section 5A. After the objections have been determined, a declaration under section 6 shall be made which shall be published in the official gazette and in such other manner as prescribed by sub-section (2) of section 6. The appropriate government shall thereafter direct the collector to make order for the acquisition of the land. The land shall be demarcated. 'Persons interested' shall be noticed under section 9 of the government's intention to take possession of the land and inviting claims to compensation for all interests in such land. Enquiry into the objections preferred by persons interested shall be made under section 11 by the collector followed by an award. The award is a determination by collector of disputes based on objections relating to:-

(1)the true area of the land acquired,

(2) the compensation which, in his opinion, should be allowed for the land by reference to the value of the land on the date of publication of the notification under section 4(1), and

(3) the respective interests of the persons claiming the compensation and directing the apportionment of the compensation among all the persons known or believed to be interested in the land, of whom, or of whose claims, he has information, whether or not they have respectively appeared before him.

ï¬ Section 12 attaches finality to the award making it a conclusive evidence as between the collector and the persons interested whether they have respectively appeared before the collector or not on three points: (i) the true area of the land, (ii) the value of the land, and (iii) the apportionment of the compensation amount among the persons interested.

ï¬ The collector may, after making the award under section 11, take possession of the land. On such taking possession, the acquired land shall vest absolutely in the government, free from all encumbrances.

ï¬ Part III of the Act deals with reference to court and procedure thereupon. Disputes as to apportionment of compensation are dealt with in Part IV. Part III consists of sections 18 to 28. Section 18 provides as under :

18. Reference to court. - (1) Any person interested who has not accepted the award may, by written application to the collector, require that the matter be referred by the collector for the determination of the court, whether his objection be to the measurement of the land, the amount of the compensation, the persons to whom it is payable, or the apportionment of the compensation among the persons interested.

(2) The application shall state the grounds on which objection to the award is taken:

Provided that every such application shall be made -

(a) if the person making it was present or represented before the collector at the time when he made his award, within six weeks from the date of the collector's award;

(b) in other cases, within six weeks of the receipt of the notice from the collector under section 12, sub-section (2); or within six months from the date of the collector's award, whichever period shall first expire.

ï¬ Section 19 prescribes the contents of the statement to be made by the collector to the court while making reference, which has to be in writing. Under section 20, the following persons shall be noticed by the court :-

(a)the applicant;

(b) all persons interested in the objection, except such (if any) of them as have consented without protest to receive payment of the compensation awarded; and

(c) if the objection is in regard to the area of the land or to the amount of compensation, the collector.

ï¬ The scheme of section 20 also suggests that collector (or state) does not fall within the meaning of 'persons interested'; collector becomes a necessary party to reference and is required to be noticed by the court when the reference relates to objection in regard to area of land or to the quantum of compensation.

ï¬ Section 21 restricts the scope of the inquiry in proceedings initiated on reference by collector to a consideration of the interests of the persons affected by the objections. Section 26 prescribes the form of award to be made by the reference court.

ï¬ Under part IV, section 29 contemplates the compensation being apportioned between several persons interested in accordance with the agreement arrived at between them. The particulars of apportionment as specified in the award shall be conclusive as between the persons who have expressed their agreement in the apportionment of the compensation. In case of dispute, section 30 provides as under :-

Section 30 -When the amount of compensation has been settled under section 11, if any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the same or any part thereof, or as to the persons to whom the same or any part thereof, is payable, the collector may refer such dispute to the decision of the court.

ï¬ Under section 31, the collector is obliged to tender payment of the compensation to the persons interested in accordance with the award. The collector is obliged to withhold distribution of the awarded amount to the awardee or amongst the awardees and deposit the amount of compensation in the reference court in three situations:-

(i) if awardees do not consent to receive the amount of compensation,

(ii) if there be no person competent to alienate the lands, or

(iii) if there be any dispute as to the title to receive the compensation or as to the apportionment of it.

ï¬ The two provisions contemplating power of the collector to make reference as contained in section 18 and section 30 of the Act need a comparative study. Under section 18 the subject-matter of reference can be a dispute as to any one or more of the following: (i) as to the measurement of the land, (ii) as to the amount or the quantum of the compensation, (iii) as to the persons to whom the compensation is payable, (iv) as to the apportionment of the compensation among the persons interested. Under section 30 the subject matter of dispute can be: (i) the apportionment of the amount of compensation or any part thereof, (ii) the persons to whom the amount of compensation or any part thereof is payable. Though the expression employed in section 18 is 'the amount of compensation' while the expression employed in section 30 is 'the amount of compensation or any part thereof', this distinction in legislative drafting is immaterial and insignificant and a dispute as to entitlement or apportionment of part of the compensation would also be covered by section 18 of the Act on the principle that the whole includes a part too. Thus, at the first blush, it seems that section 30 overlaps section 18 in part; but as will be seen shortly hereinafter, it is not so.

12. Dr. G.H. Grant v. State of Bihar (supra) is a three-judge bench decision of this Court wherein the scheme of the Act by reference to the power vesting in the collector to make a reference came up for the consideration of the court. The three-judge bench by a majority of 2:1 laid down the following principles :

(i)There are two provisions in the Act under which the collector can make a reference to the court, namely, section 18 and section 30. The powers under the two sections are distinct and may be invoked in contingencies which do not overlap. A person shown in that part of the award which relates to apportionment of compensation who is present either personally or through a representative or on whom notice is issued under section 12(2), must, if he does not accept the award, apply to the collector to refer the matter to the court under section 18 within the time prescribed thereunder. But a person who has not appeared in the acquisition proceedings before the collector may, if he is not served with notice of filing, raise a dispute as to apportionment or as to the persons to whom it is payable and apply to the court for a reference under section 30, for determination of his right to compensation which may have existed before the award, or which may have devolved upon him since the award. For a reference under section 30, no period of limitation is prescribed.

(ii) It is not predicated of the exercise of the power to make a reference under section 30 that the collector has not apportioned the compensation money by his award.

(iii)The award made by the collector under section 11 is not the source of the right to compensation. An award is strictly speaking only an offer made by the government to the person interested in the land notified for acquisition; the person interested is not bound to accept it and the government can also withdraw the acquisition under section 48. It is only when possession of the land has been taken by the government under section 16 that the right of the owner of the land is extinguished. Therefore the appellant's contention that title to compensation is derived solely from and on the date of the award could not be accepted.

(iv)The liability of the government under section 31 to pay compensation to the person entitled thereto under the award does not imply that only the persons to whom compensation is directed to be paid under the award may raise a dispute under section 30. The scheme of apportionment by the collector under section 11 is conclusive only between the collector and the persons interested and not among the persons interested. Payment of compensation under section 31 to the persons declared in the award to be entitled thereto discharges the state of its liability to pay compensation leaving it open to the claimant to compensation to agitate his right in a reference under section 30 or by a separate suit.

(v)Under the Bihar Land Reforms Act the title of the appellant to the land noticed for acquisition became vested in the state and therefore the right to compensation for the land acquired devolved upon the State. A dispute then arose between the state government and the appellant "as to the persons to whom" compensation was payable. The state had no right to the compensation payable for the land under a title existing before the date of the award of the collector and no application could be made by it as a person interested within the meaning of section 18. But a dispute between the appellant and the state as to their conflicting claims to the compensation money was clearly a dispute which could be referred under section 30 of the Act to the court. There is nothing in section 30 which excludes a reference to the court of a dispute raised by a person on whom the title of the owner of the land has since the award, devolved (emphasis supplied).

13. Keeping in view the principles laid down by this Court in Dr. G.H. Grant's case (supra) and analysing in-depth the provisions of the Act the difference between reference under section 18 and the one under section 30 can be summarized and set out as under:-
By reference to locus

Under section 18(1) a reference can be made by collector only upon an application in writing having been made by (i) any person interested (ii) who has not accepted the award (iii) making application in writing, to the collector, requiring a reference by the collector to the court (iv) for determination of any one of the four disputes (specified in the provision), and (v) stating the grounds on which objection to the award is taken. For reference under section 30 no application in writing is required. The prayer may be made orally or in writing or the reference may be made suo motu by the collector without any one having invited the attention of the collector for making the reference.

By reference to the disputes referable

Under section 18(1) there are four types of disputes which can be referred to civil court for determination. They are the disputes: (i) as to the measurement of the land, (ii) as to the amount of the compensation, (iii) as to the persons to whom the compensation is payable, or (d) as to the apportionment of the compensation among the persons interested. Under section 30 the only disputes which are referable are : (i) any dispute as to the apportionment of the amount of compensation or any part thereof, or (ii) a dispute as to the persons to whom the amount of compensation or any part thereof is payable. A dispute as to the measurement of the land or as to the quantum of compensation or a dispute of a nature not falling within section 30, can neither be referred by the collector under section 30 of the Act nor would the civil court acquire jurisdiction to enter and determine the same.

By reference to nature of power

Under section 18 of the Act the collector does not have power to withhold the reference. Once a written application has been made satisfying the requirements of section 18, the collector shall make a reference. The collector has no discretion in the matter; whether the dispute has any merit or not is to be left for the determination of the court. Under section 30 the collector may refer such dispute to the decision of the court. The collector has discretion in the matter. Looking to the nature of the dispute raised, the person who is raising the dispute, the delay in inviting the attention of the court, and so on - are such illustrative factors which may enter into the consideration by the collector while exercising the discretion. If the collector makes the reference it may be decided by the court subject to its forming an opinion that the dispute was capable of reference and determination under section 30 of the Act. In case the collector refuses to make a reference under section 30 of the Act, the person adversely affected by withholding of the reference or refusal to make the reference shall be at liberty to pursue such other remedy as may be available to him under the law such as filing a writ petition or a civil suit.
By reference to limitation

Under section 18 the written application requiring the matter to be referred by the collector for the determination of the court shall be filed within six weeks from the date of the collector's award if the person making it was present or represented before the collector at the time when he made his award or within six weeks of the notice from the collector under section 12(2) or within six months from the date of the collector's award, whichever period shall first expire. There is no such limitation prescribed under section 30 of the Act. The collector may at any time, not bound by the period of limitation, exercise his power to make the reference. The expression 'the person present or represented' before the collector at the time when he made his award would include within its meaning a person who shall be deemed to be present or represented before the collector at the time when the award is made. No one can extend the period of limitation by taking advantage of his own wrong. Though no limitation is provided for making a reference under section 30 of the Act, needless to say, where no period of limitation for exercise of any statutory power is prescribed the power can nevertheless be exercised only within a reasonable period; what is a reasonable period in a given case shall depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.

14. The scheme of the Act reveals that the remedy of reference under section 18 is intended to be available only to a 'person interested'. A person present either personally or through representative or on whom a notice is served under section 12(2) is obliged, subject to his specifying the test as to locus, to apply to the collector within the time prescribed under section 18(2) to make a reference to the court. The basis of title on which the reference would be sought for under section 18 would obviously be a pre-existing title by reference to the date of the award. So is section 29, which speaks of 'persons interested'. Finality to the award spoken of by section 12(1) of the Act is between the collector on one hand and the 'persons interested' on the other hand and attaches to the issues relating to (i) the true area, i.e. measurement of the land, (ii) the value of the land, i.e. the quantum of compensation, and (iii) apportionment of the compensation among the 'persons interested'. The 'persons interested' would be bound by the award without regard to the fact whether they have respectively appeared before the collector or not. The finality to the award spoken of by section 29 is as between the 'persons interested' inter se and is confined to the issue as to the correctness of the apportionment. Section 30 is not confined in its operation only to 'persons interested'. It would, therefore, be available for being invoked by the 'persons interested' if they were neither present nor represented in proceedings before the collector, nor were served with notice under section 12(2) of the Act or when they claim on the basis of a title coming into existence post award. The definition of 'person interested' speaks of 'an interest in compensation to be made'. An interest coming into existence post award gives rise to a claim in compensation which has already been determined. Such a person can also have recourse to section 30. In any case, the dispute for which section 30 can be invoked shall remain confined only (i) as to the apportionment of the amount of compensation or any part thereof, or (ii) as to the persons to whom the amount of compensation (already determined) or any part thereof is payable. The state claiming on the basis of a pre-existing right would not be a 'person interested', as already pointed out hereinabove and on account of its right being pre-existing, the state, in such a case, would not be entitled to invoke either section 18 or section 30 seeking determination of its alleged pre-existing right. A right accrued or devolved post award may be determined in a reference under section 30 depending on collector's discretion to show indulgence, without any bar as to limitation. Alternatively, such a right may be left open by the collector to be adjudicated upon in any independent legal proceedings. This view is just, sound and logical as a title post award could not have been canvassed upto the date of the award and should also not be left without remedy by denying access to section 30. Viewed from this angle, section 18 and 30 would not overlap and would have fields to operate independent of each other.

15. We have entered into examining the scheme of the Act and exploring the difference between reference under section 18 and the one under section 30 of the Act as it was necessary for finding out answer to the core question staring before us. The power to acquire by state the land owned by its subjects hails from the right of eminent domain vesting in the state which is essentially an attribute of sovereign power of the state. So long as the public purpose subsists the exercise of the power by the state to acquire the land of its subjects without regard to the wishes or willingness of the owner or person interested in the land cannot be questioned. (See - Scindia Employees' Union v. State of Maharashtra and Ors.1, and State of Maharashtra v. Sant Joginder Singh Kishan Singh and Ors.2). The state does not acquire its own land for it is futile to exercise the power of eminent domain for acquiring rights in the land, which already vests in the state. It would be absurdity to comprehend the provisions of Land Acquisition Act being applicable to such land wherein the ownership or the entirety of rights already vests in the state. In other words, the land owned by the state on which there are no private rights or encumbrances is beyond the purview of the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act. The position of law is so clear as does not stand in need of any authority to support. Still a few decided cases in point may be referred since available.

16. In Collector of Bombay v. Nusurwanji Rattanji Mistri & Others (supra) this Court held that when the government acquires lands under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, it must be for a public purpose, and with a view to put them to that purpose, the government acquires the sum total of all private interests subsisting in them. If the government has itself an interest in the land, it has only to acquire the other interests outstanding thereof so that it might be in a position to pass it on absolutely for public user. An interesting argument was advanced before the Supreme Court. It was submitted that the right of the government to levy assessment on the lands is an 'encumbrance' and that encumbrance is capable of acquisition. The court held that the word 'encumbrance' as occurring in section 16 can only mean interests in respect of which a compensation was made under section 11 or could have been claimed. It cannot include the right of the government to levy assessment on the lands. The Act does not contemplate the interest of the government in any land being valued or compensation being awarded therefor.

17. In Secretary of State v. Sri Narain Khanna1 it was held that where the government acquires any property consisting of land and buildings and where the land was subject- matter of the government grant, subject to the power of resumption by government at any time on giving one month's notice, then the compensation was payable only in respect of such buildings as may have been authorized to be erected and not in respect of the land.

18. In 'In the matter of the Land Acquisition Act : Govt. of Bombay v. Esufali Salebhai2', Batchelor, J held that the government are not debarred from acquiring and paying for the only outstanding interests merely because the Act, which primarily contemplates all interests as held outside government, directs that the entire compensation based upon the market value of the whole land must be distributed among the claimants. The government was held liable to acquire and pay only for the super-structure as it was already the owner of the land.

19. In 'Deputy Collector, Calicut Division v. Aiyavu Pillay3, Wallis, J. observed that the Act does not contemplate or provide for the acquisition of any interest which already belongs to government in land which is being acquired under the Act but only for the acquisition of such interests in the land as do not already belong to the government.

20. In Collector of Bombay v. Nusurwanji Rattanji Mistri & Others (supra), the decision in Esufali Salebhai's case and Aiyavu Pillay's case were cited with approval. Expressing its entire agreement with the said views the court held that when government possesses an interest in land which is the subject of acquisition under the Act, that interest is itself outside such acquisition because there can be no question of government acquiring what is its own. An investigation into the nature and value of that interest is necessary for determining the compensation payable for the interest outstanding in the claimants but that would not make it the subject of acquisition. In land acquisition proceedings there is no value of the right of the government to levy assessment on the lands and there is no award of compensation therefor. It was, therefore, held by a division bench of judicial commissioners in Mohammad Wajeeh Mirza v. Secretary of State for India in Council1 that the question of title arising between the government and another claimant cannot be settled by the judge in a reference under section 18 of the Act. When the government itself claims to be owner of the land there can be no question of its acquisition and the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act cannot be applicable. In our opinion the statement of law so made by the learned judicial commissioners is correct.

21. The collector acts as a representative of the state whilst holding proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act. In fact, he conducts the proceedings on behalf of the state. The award of the collector is not the source of the right to compensation; it is the pre-existing right which is recognized by the collector and guided by the findings arrived at in determining the objections, if any, the collector quantifies the amount of compensation to be placed as an offer of the appropriate government to the owner recognized by the state. The offeree may accept or decline the offer. If he accepts the offer and the government takes possession over the land, the title of the offeree is extinguished and vests absolutely in the government free from all encumbrances. The power to make an award under section 11 and to make a reference under sections 18 or 30 of the Act is a statutory power. The sweep of jurisdiction of court to determine the disputes is also statutory and is controlled by the bounds created by section 17 or 30 whereunder the reference has been made to the court. The power has to be exercised to the extent to which it has been conferred by the statute and on availability of pre-existing conditions on the availability of which and which alone the power can be exercised.

22. Award made by the collector is final and conclusive as between the collector and the 'persons interested', whether they have appeared before the collector or not, on two issues : (i) as to true area, i.e. measurement of land acquired, (ii) as to value of the land, i.e. the amount of compensation, and (iii) as to the apportionment of the compensation among the 'persons interested' - again, between the collector and the 'persons interested' and not as amongst the 'persons interested' inter se. In the event of a reference having been sought for under section 18, the collector's award on these issues; if varied by civil court, shall stand superseded to that extent. The scheme of the Act does not attach a similar finality to the award of the collector on the issue as to the person to whom compensation is payable; in spite of the award by collector and even on failure to seek reference, such issue has been left available to be adjudicated upon by any competent forum.

23. In Nusserwanjee Pestonjee v. Meer Mynoodeen Khan Wullud Meer Sudroodeen Khan Bahadoor1, their Lordships of the Privy Council have held that wherever jurisdiction is given by a statute and such jurisdiction is only given upon certain specified terms contained therein it is a universal principle that those terms should be complied with, in order to create and raise the jurisdiction, and if they are not complied with the jurisdiction does not arise. The privy council decision above-said was followed and the statement of law made therein approved by this Court in Kothamasu Kanakarathamma and Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.2. This Court held that under the Land Acquisition Act the matter goes to the court only upon a reference made by the collector and there is no doubt that the jurisdiction of the court arises solely on the basis of a reference made to it. The court can adjudicate upon the matter referred to it but the court is certainly not invested with the jurisdiction to consider a matter not directly connected with it and this is not a matter of mere technicality. A case of lack of inherent jurisdiction will not be cured by mere failure to object to the proceedings before the court on the ground of an absence of reference on matters not referred. There can be no waiver or acquiescence. Indeed, when there is an absence of inherent jurisdiction, the defect cannot be waived nor can be cured by acquiescence,

24. To sum up the state is not a 'person interested' as defined in section 3(b) of the Act. It is not a party to the proceedings before the collector in the sense, which the expression 'parties to the litigation' carries. The collector holds the proceedings and makes an award as a representative of the state government. Land or an interest in land pre-owned by state cannot be subject matter of acquisition by state. The question of deciding the ownership of state or holding of any interest by the state government in proceedings before the collector cannot arise in proceedings before the collector (as defined in section 3(c) of the Act). If it was a government land there was no question of initiating the proceedings for acquisition at all. The government would not acquire the land, which already vests in it. A dispute as to pre-existing right or interest of the state government in the property sought to be acquired is not a dispute capable of being adjudicated upon or referred to the civil court for determination either under section 18 or section 30 of the Act. The reference made by the collector to the court was wholly without jurisdiction and the civil court ought to have refused to entertain the reference and ought to have rejected the same. All the proceedings under section 30 of the Act beginning from the reference and adjudication thereon by the court suffer from lack of inherent jurisdiction and are therefore a nullity liable to be declared so.

25. However, we would like to clarify our decision by sounding two notes of caution. Firstly, the quashing of the proceedings under section 30 of the Land Acquisition Act would not debar the state from pursuing such other legal remedy before such other forum as may be available to the state government and on the merits and the maintainability thereof we express no opinion herein. Secondly, the situation in law would have been entirely different if the title of the appellant would have come to an end by any event happening or change taking place after the making of the award by the collector as was the case in Dr. G.H. Grant v. State of Bihar1. The title of Dr. Ghosh had come to an end by change of law referable to a date subsequent to the making of the award. In this context it was held - "...............there is no reason why the right to claim a reference of a dispute about the person entitled to compensation may not be exercised by the person on whom the title has devolved since the date of the award" and "there is nothing in section 30 which excludes a reference to the court of a dispute raised by a person on whom the title of the owner of land has, since the award, devolved".

26. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the division bench is set aside and that of the learned single judge restored with costs throughout.

**********
HEADNOTE
SPECIFIC RELIEF LAW 
Specific Relief Act, 1963 
Section 34 - Declaration and possession - Suit for - Bund - Plaintiff"s land on eastern side - Defendant"s land on western side - Alleged trespass by defendant on a portion of "bund" - Bund and land on eastern side claimed to be allotted in partition decree of 1943 - Predecessor of defendant, having trespassed a portion of bund, plaintiff brought suit in 1962 - Compromise arrived - Said predecessor vacating trespassed portion - Suit allowed to be dismissed - Said predecessor selling said land in favour of defendant - In pleadings defendant claiming bund to be common and to be maintained by both parties - Suit decreed by trial court - Though first appellate court reversing the judg-ment, High Court agreeing with trial court, but resorting to pro-active move to put an end to the controversy. Held that such a move was unsustainable. Judgment set-aside and case remitted to trial court for considering if suit land was encroached by de-fendant and was part of common bund.
HELD
The trial court recorded the finding that plaint "B" sched-ule land is not a part of plaint "A" schedule property and that the plaint "B" schedule is a part of a common bund (varamba) situated in survey no.183/4. The trial court further found that the entire survey no.183/4 having an extent of 13 cents was thengu varamba (coconut varamba) and the same belonged to Mundas-seri Tarwad". The judgment of the first appellate court does not improve the position so far as this aspect of the matter is concerned. The High Court too not pay attention pointedly to this question, instead strayed into the proactive" role as stated in the judgment. Such a course neither based on the case of the parties, nor with the sanction of law, is clearly unsustainable. In the facts and circumstances of the case, in our considered view, the case should be remitted to the trial court for consid-ering the question whether the suit land which as alleged by the plaintiffs has been encroached upon by the first defendant and of which recovery of possession is sought, was a part of the common bund (thedaya varamba) situated in survey no. 183/4. (Para 11)


D.P. MOHAPATRA, J. 
1. Leave granted. 
2. This appeal filed by the plaintiffs is directed against the judgment of the High Court of Kerala in second appeal No. 601/89 in which the High Court set aside the decisions of the first appellate Court and disposed of the suit granting portions of the suit property to both the parties with certain other directions. The operating portion of the judgment reads as follows :
"In the result, I allow this Second Appeal and set aside the judgments and decrees of the courts below and grant the plain-tiffs a decree declaring the title of the plaintiffs over the green shaded plot market "XYZ" in the commissioner"s plan Ext.C2. I also give a declaration to the first defendant of his title over the yellow shaded plot in Ext.C2 plan marked "WXZ" by me in the plan. I grant a decree to the plaintiffs to get the obstruc-tions, if any, removed for the free flow of water from the east-ern paddy fields to the west of the green shaded bund their title over which I have hereby declared. I direct that the plan Ext.C2 will be appended to the decree. The defendants would be re-strained from interfering with the possession of the plaintiffs over the green shaded portion and the plaintiffs are restrained from in any manner interfering with the possession of the defend-ants over the yellow shaded portion in Ext. C2 plan. Considering the fact this court is trying to bring about a quietus to the disputes between the parties and with a view to generate future goodwill, I direct the parties to suffer their respective costs in all the courts." 
3. The controversy raised in the case relates to a bund referred to as "thedaya varamba" or "coconut varamba" or thengu varamba" situated in survey No. 183/4 which is described in Schedule B of the plaint. On the eastern side of the bund lies the land of the plaintiffs and on the western side lies the land of contesting defendant. The plaintiffs went to Court with the cause, inter alia, that the bund(varamba) on survey no. 183/4 is a part of their property and they have exclusive title and possession over the same. They alleged that the first defendant illegally tres-passed upon a portion of the bund (varamba). The plaintiffs prayed for declaration of their title to the property and recov-ery of possession of the portion allegedly trespassed upon by the first defendant. The further claim of the plaintiffs was that the bund (varamba) along with other land lying on its eastern side was allotted to their predecessor in interest in the final decree in partition suit no.44/1943. Since then their predecessor in interest and the plaintiffs themselves had been in exclusive enjoyment of the properties allotted in their favour in the decree including the properties in Schedule B of the plaint. The vendor of the first defendant, Sankaranarayanan Nair, having trespassed on a portion of the bund the plaintiffs had filed O.S.No. 682 of 1962. During the pendency of the said suit a compromise was entered into between the parties and Sankaranar-ayanan Nair accepted the position that the bund (varamba) on survey no. 183/4 belonged to the plaintiffs and he vacated the portion encroached by him. In view of settlement of the dispute between 
the parties the suit was allowed to be dismissed. Subse-quently, Sankar-anarayanan Nair, executed a sale deed on 25.3.82 in favour of the first defendant alienating certain properties including survey no 183/4, though he had no interest therein. Thereafter the first defendant trespassed upon a portion of the bund. 
4. The first defendant in his written statement denied the claim of exclusive title and possession of the plaintiffs over the bund (varamba) lying in survey no. 183/4. He also denied to have trespassed upon any portion of the bund (varamba). He however, accepted the position that the bund (varamba) in survey no. 183/4 is the common bund dividing his land and the land of the plain-tiffs. From the discussions in the judgment of the courts below it appears that the first defendant also accepted the position that the bund (varamba) was to be maintained by both the parties since it was useful for flow of water from and land of the plain-tiffs which is at a higher level than the land of the first defendant. 
5. On the pleadings of the parties the trial court framed in all nine issues of which issues Nos. 1,3 and 4 are relevant for the purpose of the present case. They are :
1. Whether the description, boundaries, survey no, shown in the plaint schedule are correct ?
3. Whether the "B" schedule property is a part of "A" schedule property and whether it is the part of varamba mentioned in the plaint schedule ?
4. Whether the trespass alleged is 
true ?
Under the issue No.1 the trial court found that the description and survey no. as shown in the plaint schedule are correct. Taking up issue Nos.3 and 4 together the trial court found that plaint "B" schedule is not a part of plaint "A" schedule property and that plaint "B" schedule is a part of common bund (varamba) situated in survey no. 183/4 as described in Ext. A-6 and further that there is trespass over the plaint "B" schedule but that the alleged trespass as stated in the plaint is not proved in course of the discussion. On these issues the trial court held, inter alia, that the case of the plaintiffs that the entire survey no.183/4 property was a varamba has to be accepted; that the disputed property in survey no. 183/4 is a bund (varamba) having an extent of 13 cents; that the parties never obtained any right or title over the disputed bund (varamba) in survey no.183/4 under the final decree Ext.A/1.
6. On these findings the suit was decreed on the terms as follows : 
"In the result the suit is decreed with modification and the defendant is hereby directed to reinstate the plaint "B" schedule trespassed portion of survey 183/4 common varamba into its origi-nal position within one month from the date of this judgment. If the defendant fails to comply with this direction to reinstate the plaint "B" schedule trespassed portion of survey 183/4, within one month, then the plaintiff can apply to the court to get the plaint "B" schedule trespassed portion of survey 183/4 common varamba reinstated into its original position at the plaintiffs" own expenses and the actual expenses of such rein-statment can be decided at the time of such execution by the court. The plaintiffs are entitled for their costs in this suit from the defendant."
7. Not satisfied with the decision of the trial court the first defendant filed appeal suit No. 161/85 in which the plaintiffs also filed a cross objection. The first appellate court on appreciation of the evidence on record held that by measurement the plaint "B" schedule property is not included in plaint "A" schedule property. The first appellate court further held that on the plaintiffs" own showing the first defendant and his predeces-sor Sankaranarayanan Nair had been in possession of plaint "B" schedule property since 1968 and since the plaintiffs" case is that Sankaranarayanan Nair happened to be in possession of the plaint "B" schedule property by way of trespass the possession by Sankaranarayanan Nair and the first defendant is adverse to the plaintiffs and since the present suit is filed more than 12 years from the alleged trespass committed in 1968, plaintiffs title, if any, is lost by adverse possession and limitation. On the above findings the first appellate Court allowed the appeal and set aside the judgment and decree passed by the trial court. 
8. The second appeal filed by the plaintiffs was decided by the High Court by the impugned judgment in the manner noted earlier. From the discussions in the judgment it appears that the High Court accepted the case of the plaintiffs that Sankaranarayanan Nair gave up his claim to the control of the bund (varamba) and that the plaint "B" schedule property i.e. the bund (varamba) is in the possession of the plaintiffs. The High Court made the observation that the material on record shows the absence of bona fide on part of the first defendant in taking the sale deed by including survey no. 183/4 the dispute bund (varamba) though the same was not included amongst the properties allotted to the share of Sankaranarayanan Nair and even though it was the "the-daya varamba" of the plaintiffs. Discussing the question of relief to be granted in the suit the High Court felt inclined to agree 
with the position adopted by the trial 
court, but Court made these further observation :
"The only other alternative open to this Court, if it is inclined to be judicially active so as to prevent further disputes between the parties, is to recognise the appropriation of a portion of the bund by the defendants after purchase from Sankaranarayanan Nair and on the basis of that appropriation bring about a divi-sion of the bund between the parties so as to avert future dis-putes over the same. It is seen from the report of the commissioner Ext. C2 that the green shaded portion still remains as a bund and the yellow shaded portion lying to the west of it has been an-nexed by the defendants with their paddy fields. Roughly two extents seem to be more or less equal though the green shaded portion might have more extent than the yellow shaded portion now annexed by the defendants. This court, to ensure that future disputes between the parties are averted, can, in my view, not-withstanding the protest of counsel for the plaintiffs and coun-sel for the defendants, recognise the de facto division brought about the action of the defendants and declare exclusive title of the respective parties to the respective portions with a view to avert future litigation."
9. From the discussions in the judgment it appears that the High Court embarked upon this "pro-active move" with a view to put an end to the controversy between the parties over the common bund (thedaya varamba). As the discussions show the arrangement to divide the common bund was objected to by the counsel for both the parties. The plaintiffs have filed this appeal assailing the judgment of the High Court. 
10. During the hearing of the case learned senior counsel appear-ing for both the parties contended before us that the course adopted by the High Court is neither to the satisfaction of the parties nor is it sustainable in law. Elucidating the point the learned senior counsel for the appellants submitted that in view of the accepted position of fact as found by the courts below that the common bund (thedaya varamba) in survey no. 183/4 was not the exclusive property of any of the parties and it was to be maintained as a bund for the benefit of both the parties the High Court should not have directed division of the bund and allotment of portions of the same to the parties. The thrust of the arguments of the learned senior counsel for the appellant was that there is a local custom in that part of the State of Kerala that the common bund (thedaya varamba) is to remain in possession of the owner of the land lying to the east of the bund (varamba) and has to be maintained by him. That position, according to the learned senior counsel was accepted by the first defendant also. The learned senior counsel appearing for respondent no.1 while not joining issue on the point urged that it was the spe-cific case of the first defendant that he had not trespassed upon any portion of the common bund (thedaya varamba) 
and the alleged trespassed land in 
his possession is not a part of the common bund (thedaya varamba) of the parties. 
11. From the case of the parties in the pleadings and the dis-putes raised by them before the courts below it appears to us that it is absolutely necessary to determine the question whether the suit land which is alleged to have been trespassed upon by the first defendants was a part of the common bund (thedaya varamba) situated in survey No. 183/4. On the answer to this question would depend whether a decree should be passed directing the defendant to deliver possession of the suit land to the plaintiffs for its amalgamation with the existing portion of the bund (varamba) and its maintenance as a part of the bund (varam-ba). No. doubt, the question is covered under issue no.3 framed by the trial court but as the judgment shows the trial court discussed the said issue along with issue no.4 and the question was not pointedly discussed. In a general manner the trial court recorded the finding that plaint "B" schedule land is not a part of plaint "A" schedule property and that the plaint "B" schedule is a part of a common bund (varamba) situated in survey no.183/4. The trial court further found that the entire survey no.183/4 having an extent of 13 cents was thengu varamba (coconut varamba) and the same belonged to Mundasseri Tarwad". The judgment of the first appellate court does not improve the position so far as this aspect of the matter is concerned. The High Court too not pay attention pointedly to this question, instead strayed into the proactive" role as stated in the judgment. Such a course neither based on the case of the parties, nor with the sanction of law, is clearly unsustainable. In the facts and circumstances of the case, in our considered view, the case should be remitted to the trial court for considering the question whether the suit land which as alleged by the plaintiffs has been encroached upon by the first defendant and of which recovery of possession is sought, was a part of the common bund (thedaya varamba) situated in survey no. 183/4. The trial court will give opportunity to the parties to lead further evidence on this question only, if neces-sary, and thereafter dispose of the suit in accordance with the law. We make it clear that we have not disturbed the other find-ings recorded by the trial court which were accepted by the High Court. 
12. Accordingly, we allow the appeal, set aside the impugned judgment and decree passed by the High Court and remand the case to the trial court for disposal afresh in the manner aforesaid. The trial court is directed to disposal of the suit expeditious-ly, preferably within a period of six months from the date of receipt of intimation of this order. The parties to bear respec-tive costs.
**********
CROSS CITATION
1971 SCR 181

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1655 of 1966. 183 Appeal from the judgment and decree dated August 25, 1964 of the Patna High Court in Letters Patent Appeal No. 119 of 1958. D. Goburdhun and R. Goburdhun, for the appellant. S. V. Gupte, D. P. Singh and N. Nettar, for respondent No. 1. U. P. Singh for respondents Nos. 2 to 4.

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

Shelat, J.-Two questions arise in this appeal.The first is whether the transaction evidenced by Ex. 1, dated March 20, 1915 was a family arrangement so as to confer on the appellant an,, his father, Nanhku Prasad, since deceased, title to a half share in the house in dispute. The second is that evenif it was so,whether such title became extinguished as a result of adversepossession for the statutory period by Baijnath, the deceased husband of respondent 1.

The parties are near relations. Thefollowing genealogy explains the relationship amongst them

Rajkumar Singh

Lalji Singh Amar Singh Ramji SinghRaghunandan

Reshmi Kuer Patreja KuerSingh

Nanhku Pd.

Suba Faujdar Balkeshwar Singh

(Plff. No.1)

Shambu Pd.

Decnath Singh

(Plff. No. 2)

Sonadhari Girwardhari Kamaldhari

Tarke shwar Pd. Baijnath Pd. alias

alias Daljit Nanu Babu Kamta Prasad

(Deft. No. 2) died in 1948

Phul Kumari Devi

(sons of Deft. (widow)

2-Nos. 3 to 7) Deft. No. 1.

There is no dispute that Amar Singh purchased from his own funds under a registered deed, dated January 20, 1898, the ,,landon which the house in dispute stands. Hisson, Nankhu, the deceased father of the present appellant, was taken in adoption sometime prior to March 20, 1915 by Ramji Singh and his wife Patreja Kuer as they had no issue, whereupon Nankhu ceased 184 to have any interest in the properties owned by Amar Singh and his branch. In 1933, Nankhu and the present appellant, then a minor, filed Suit No. 33 of 1933 against Sonadhari Tarkeshwar, Baijnath and Reshmi Kuer (the widow ofAmar Singh, wrongly described by the High Court as the wife of Rajkumar in the genealogy set out inits judgment) in respect of certain properties which bad nothing to dowith the house in dispute.The written statement filed inthat suit was that Nankhu had been paid the price of his share in the house in dispute andthat the entire house, consequently, belonged to and was since thenin the exclusive possession of the defendants.That suit wentupto the High Court when in 1941 a compromise application was filed by the parties settling that suit. But, as thesuit had nothing, as aforesaid, to do with the house in dispute, nothing was said about the allegation that Nankhu hadbeen paid off in respect of his interest in that house. In 1949, Nankhu and the appellant filed the instant suit for a declaration of their half share in the house in dispute. In answer to the suit, the respondents raised three defenses : (1)that Nankhu and the appellant derivedno interest under Ex. 1.(2) that assuming that they derivedsuch interest, it was relinquished by them on being paid the price thereof, and (3) that in any event they lost their interest by reason of adverse possession by the respondents The Trial Court rejected all the three defenses raised by the respondents and decreed the suit, holdingthat Nankhu had acquired one half share in the said house under Ex. I. Against that decree, two appeals were filed in theHigh Court,one by respondent I and the other by some of the other respondentdents.These appeals were heard first by a learned Single Judge of the High Court. Before the learned Single Judge, the finding of the Trial Court that Nankhu and the present appellant had not relinquished their interest in the house on their being paid the price thereof was not disputed. The only questions agitated beforethe learned SingleJudge,therefore, were whether Nankhuhad ahalf share, that is to say, whether he derived his title to,the half share under and by virtue of Ex. 1, and if so, whether he lost it as a result ofadverse possession by the respondents.

In respect of the first question. the parties urged two conflicting pleas. Nankhu and the appellant contendedthat Ex. I was a family arrangement under which he gothalf share in the house and that that family arrangement was valid and binding on the parties. The respondents, on the other hand, contended that Ex. I was only a Ladavi deed, that is, a deed of relinquishment. The argument on behalf of Nankhu and the appellant was that there were outstanding disputes between the different branches of the family of Rajkumar, and those disputes 185 were ultimately settled at the instance of and with the aid of certain family friends resulting in Ex. I by way of a familyarrangement. Therefore, even if Nankhu and the appellant were not able to show their anterior title to the house,they were entitled under Ex.I to a half share therein. The learned Single Judge accepted the contention raisedby Nankhu and the appellant. His reasoning inthis connection was that although the land on which thesuit house stood was purchased by Amar Singh outof his own funds,it was purchased in the furzi name of Lalji, but there was no evidence that Lalji ever admitted to be the furzidar of Amar Singh. Consequently, though Nankhu, by his ,adoption, lost all interest in theproperties ofAmar Singh,yet the fact that in Ex. I Amar Singhacknowledged Nankhu having a half share in the house indicated that there was some apprehension in the mind of Amar Singh of a future dispute and that it was such an apprehended dispute which Ex. 1, while dealing with the house, settled.The learned SingleJudge added that ,even assuming that there was no existing or apprehended dispute and the settlement wasmade out of considerationfor the peace of thefamilyor preservation of its properties, the settlement would have to be regarded as a family arrangement. Regarding theplea of adverse possession, 'he upheld the finding of the Trial Court that Nankhu and the appellant had established their acts of possession during the statutory Period, andthat consequently, the continuityand exclusiveness of the respondents' adverse possession had been disrupted. On these findings, he dismissed the appeals and confirmedthe decree passed by the 'Trial Court.

Respondent I thereupon filed a letters patent appeal which was heard by a Division Bench of the High Court. Thesame two questions were reagitated, namely, as to the nature of Ex. 1, and as to the adverse possession. On the first question, the reasoning adopted by the Division Bench was on the following lines :

(1) that the executants of Ex. I formed

three conflicting groups, namely,

(a) Suba, Faujdar and Balkeshwar,

constituting one group of members of Lalji's

branch, being executants 1 to 3;

(b) Raghunandan and his son, Kamaldhari,

being executants 4 and5 andconstituting

Raghunandan's branch; and

(c) Amar Singh for himself and as the

guardian of Baijnath, then a minor, Sonadbari

for himself and as guardian of his minorson,

Tarkeshwar, and Nankhu, who had,

186

as earlier stated, gone to the line of Ramji

on his adoption, being executants 6,7 and 8;

(2) that the disputes, in settlement of

which Ex. I was executed bythese three

groups, were, as its recitals show :

(a) conflicting claims made by thesaid

three sets of executants as to whetherthey

were joint or separate in status, the claim of

executants 1 to 3 being that all the members

of Rajkumar's family were still members of an

undivided Hindu family, and that therefore,

although the properties stood in the names of

and were in possession of individual members,

they continued to be joint family properties

including properties standing in the names of

female members, namely, Reshmi and Patreja;

(b) the allegation by executants 4 and 5

(Raghunandan's branch) that all thefour

branches of Rajkumar's four sons were separate

and yetclaiming share in the properties

standingin the names of members of Lalji's

branch, and

(c) the claimby executants 6, 7 and 8

(Amar Singh, Sonadhari and Nankhu-by now in

the line of Ramji) that the partieswere

separate in status, and therefore, the

properties in the names of the twosaid

females belonged exclusively to them and the

members of the other branches had no interest

whatsoever in them-,

(3) that the Trial Court andthe learned

Single Judge were in error in holdingthat

what Ex.I did was to evidence relinquishment

by the rest of the members of the family of

their claims in properties standing in the

names of or in possession of particular

members, and thereby acknowledging their

anteriortitle in such properties. Infact

Nankhu had no such anterior title, nor could

be in law have any such title in the house in

dispute in view of his having got out ofAmar

Singh's branch as a result of his adoption by

Ramji;

(4) that there wasno subsisting or

apprehended dispute between Amar Singh and his

family, on the one hand, and Nankhu on the

other, the latter not having made any claim

for a share in the house in dispute, andthat

therefore, there was no question of

preservation ofpeace or family property,

there being nothing on record to showthat

Nankhu had held out any threat to the family

peace or property; therefore, there was a

total want of mutuality as in consideration of

Nankhu getting a half share,

187

Amar Singh got nothing in return and cases of

the type of Williams v. Williams(1) had no

application;

(5) that the recitals in Ex. I showedthat

the only dispute which prevailed at thetime

was "branchwise" and in that dispute Nankhu

did not set up any contest against Amar Singh

and his branch and indeed, both of them acted

in concert, both claiming that the members of

Rajkumar's family were separate and the

properties standing in the names of Reshmi and

Patreja were their exclusive properties;

(6) that acknowledgement of exclusive title

of Amar Singh and Sonadhari (executants 6 and

7) to certainproperties, and likewise

acknowledgement of exclusive title of Nanhku

(executant No. 8) to certain other properties

set out in paras 3 and 4 of Ex. I were not by

way of settlement of any existing or

apprehended dispute betweenthem, and

therefore, that part of Ex. I could not be

regardedas providing any consideration for

conferring the half share in the disputed

house on Nanhku.

On this reasoning the Division Bench declined to treat Ex. I as a family arrangement. The conclusion of the Bench clearly signified that it had reliedon two fundamental premises: (1) that there were only three sets of executants, the third set consisting ;of executants 6, 7 and 8, and (2) that Amar Singh and Nanhku had acted in concert as there were no conflicting claims by and between them. In view of this conclusion there was no need for the Division Bench to go into the question ofadverse possession. However, it decided to do so for the reason that although the finding on the questionof adverse possession was concurrent, it had bee,-, seriously challenged before it. On this question, the Division Bench firstly relied on the Municipal Assessment Register for 1900-1901, (Ex. D), and the extract from the Demand Register of a Patna Municipality for 1915-16, (Ex. E).Ex. D showed the name of Amar Singh as the sole owner of the property. Ex.E mentioned Sonadhari and Baijnath only as the owners of the house as Amar Singh had died soon after Ex. I was broughtinto existence. The Division Bench was impressed by thefact that though only recently, in March 1915, Nanbku'shalf share in the house had been acknowledged in Ex. 1, hisname was deliberately omitted inEx. E, which meantthat Sonadhari and Baijnath had openly asserted their title to the whole of the house and yet anhku took no steps to assert his title. Nor did he at any time

(1) [1867] 2 Cb. A. 294. 188 pay his share of the municipal taxes and the costs of repairs carried out later on by Baijnath. The Division Bench was also impressed with the fact that evenwhen Baijnath, in his written statement in suit No. 33 of 1933, claimed that Nanhku's share had been paid off and be had since then been in exclusive possession of the entire house, Nankhu took no steps to vindicate his title until he and his son filed the present suit in 1949. The Division Bench came to the conclusion that there was not only an assertion of a hostile claimby Baijnath but thatthat assertion was accompanied by an ouster which remained open and continuous throughout the statutory period. As regards the evidence khat Nanhku and sometimes his wife came and stayed in the house,the Division Bench took the view that thesewere casualvisits"in the nature of visits of guests of the defendants", and therefore, did not have the effect of interrupting the continuityand the exclusiveness of possession by the respondents.The Bench even observed that the respondents had completed their titleby adverse possession long before Baijnath claimed exclusive possession in his said written statement in 1933. In this view, the Division Bench held that Nanhku's title in the house was extinguished by adverse possession.The Division Bench accordingly allowed the respondents' appeal with costs all throughout. Both the conclusions of the Division Bench have been challenged before us as incorrect.

On the question as to the nature of Ex. I a large number of decisions were cited at the bar to show when a transaction can be said to be a family arrangement. It is not necessary to advert to them as most of them have been considered by this Court in its previous decisions, wherein principles as to when an agreement can properly be regarded as a family arrangement have been set out, Thus, in Pullaiah v. Narasimham(1) after setting out how courts in Englandview family arrangements, Subba Rao, J. (as he then was) observed that the concept of such a family arrangement has alsobeen accepted by courts in India, adapting the concept tosuit the family set up in this country which is different in many respects from that obtaining in England. After examining some earlier decisions which be characterized as illustrations of how family arrangements were viewed, he summarized the law as to a family arrangement as follows: -

,,Briefly stated, though conflict of legal

claims in praesenti or in future is generally

a condition for the validity of a family

arrangement, it is not necessarily so.Even

bona fide disputes, present or possible, which

may

(1) A. I. R. 1966 S. C. 1837.

189

not involve legal claims will suffice.

Members of a joint Hindu family may, to

maintainpeace or to bring about harmony in

the family, enter into such a family arrange-

ment. If such an arrangement is enteredinto

bona fide and the terms thereof are fair in

the circumstances of a particular case, Courts

will more readily give assent tosuch

arrangement than to avoid it".

Even in England, family arrangements are viewed as arrangements governed by principles which are not applicable to dealings between strangers. The courts, when deciding the rightsof parties under family arrangements, considerwhat is most for the interest of families and have regard to considerations which in dealings between persons not members of the same family would not be taken into account. Matters which would be fatal to the validity of similar transactions between strangers are not objections to the binding effect of family arrangements. (see Halsbury's Lawsof England, (3rd Ed.), Vol. 17, 215). Thus, in Williams v. Williams(1) the Court held that a family arrangement might be such as the court would uphold although there were no rights in dispute, and if sufficient motive for the arrangement was proved, the Court would not consider the adequacy of consideration. But the question of consideration or mutuality wouldarise,as Williams' case(1)shows,when other considerations, such as existing or an apprehended dispute or the question of preservation of property or honour of the family, are absent, so that it is not necessary for a valid family arrangement that there must exist actual competitive claimsor disputes or that the arrangements must be backed by proper consideration. Even disputes likely to arise in futureor preservation of family property and honour would be sufficientto uphold an arrangement bona fidemade between the members of a family.

What actually happens when such a family arrangement is made is explained by Bose, J., in Sahu Madho Das v. Mukund Ram(1) in the following words :

"It is well settled that a compromise or

family arrangement is based on the assumption

that there is an antecedent title of some sort

in the parties and the agreementacknowledges

and defines what that title is, each party

relinquishing all claims to property other

than they had previously asserted, to the

portions allotted to them respectively.That

explainswhy no conveyance isrequired in

these cases to pass the title from the one in

whom itresides to the person receiving it

under the

(1) [1867] 2 Ch.A. 294.

(2) [1955] 2 S. C. R. 22.

190

family arrangement. It is assumed that the

title claimed by the person receiving the

propertyunder the arrangement had always

resided in him or her so far as the property

falling to his or her share is concerned and

therefore no conveyance is necessary."

He went on to say that this was not the only kind of arrangement which the courts would uphold, and thatthey would take the next step of upholding "an arrangement under which one set of persons abandons all claims to all title and interestin all the properties in dispute and acknowledges that the sole and absolute title to all the properties resides in only one of their number (provided he or she had claimed the whole and made such an assertion of title)and are content to take such properties as are assigned to them as gifts pure and simple from him or her or as a conveyance for consideration when consideration is present". In such a kind of arrangement where title in the ,(entire property is acknowledged to reside in only one of them and thereupon that person assigns parts of it to others there would be a transfer by that agreement itself which obviously in such a case would need a registered document. This decision lays down the assumption underlying a family arrangement, namely, of an anterior title and its acknowledgement in one to whom a property orpart of it falls under the arrangement. (see also Rani Mewa Kuwar v. Rani Hulas Kuwar(1). Therefore, it is not necessarythat there must exist an anterior title sustainable in law in such a person which the others acknowledge.

The arrangement under challenge has to be considered as a whole for ascertaining whether it was made to allay disputes, existing or apprehended, in theinterest of harmony in the family or the preservation of property. It is not necessary that there must exist a dispute, actual or possible in the future, in respect of each and every item of property and amongst all members arrayed oneagainst the other. It would be sufficient if it is shown that there were actual or possible claims and counter,claims by parties in settlement whereof the arrangement as a whole hadbeen arrived at, thereby acknowledging title in one to whom a particular property falls on the assumption(not actual existence in law) that he had an anterior title therein. In the light of these decisions we must now examine Ex. I to see if the contention of the appellant that it was a family arrangement is correct or not.

The document Ex. 1, after reciting the death of the common ancestor, Rajkumar, his leaving him surviving four sons and the

(1) (1873-1874) L. R. 1 I. A. 157. at 166. 191 deaths of certain other family members thereafter, reads as follows :

"Signs of ill feeling developed among us, the

executants Nos.1 to 8, and at the time of

survey and settlement operations, dispute in

connection withthe properties arose. On

account of dispute, wrong statements and claim

were made. On account of which the names of

some of us, the executants were recorded in a

wrong manner on the record of rights and in

the office of thelandRegistration

Department, inrespect of some of the

properties having regard to the real state of

affairs and title. At the time of the survey

and settlement operations ,etc. the claims and

allegations of us, the executants Nos. 1 to 3,

were that we, the executants, are all members

of thejoint family and the properties

standing in the names ,of a certain member of

the family as well as those in the name of

certain female member of the family, belong to

the joint family. Contrary to this, the

claims and allegations of us executants Nos. 4

to 5 were that all the four sons of Raj Kumar

Singh became separate and that executants Nos.

1 to 3 always continued to remain separate

from the (other) executants and executants

Nos. 4 and 5 separate from the (other)

executants and executants Nos. 6 to 8 separate

from the other executants, but in spite of

this allegation of separation, executants Nos.

4 and 5, on account of dispute, made contrary

to the real state of affairs with respect to

certain properties owned and possessed by

executants Nos. 1 to 3, and executants Nos. 6

to 8 also made allegations and claims of

separation and it was alleged that executants

Nos. 1 to 5 (?) neither had nor have any

connection and concern with the properties,

which were and are in the names of Mosst.

Patriga Kuer and Mosst. Reshmi Kuer, although

no party was member of a joint family, nor was

any property joint. As the dispute among us,

the executants is contrary to the real state

of affairs, and in case the said dispute

continues there is apprehension ,of

consideration loss anddamageto us, the

executants, therefore, on the advice of the

well wishers of the parties ,and of the

respectable persons and on the advice of the

legal advisers of the parties, as also with a

view to set at rest all kinds of dispute, it

was settled that all the disputes should be

put to an endby executing a deed of

agreement by way of a deed of relinquishment

of claims (ladavi) and the property, which is

actually,ownedand possessed by a certain

party should be declared to belong tothat

party exclusively, and as a

192

matter of fact, the family of us, the

executants, is separate and the property,

which stands in the name of a certain person,

has been purchased from his or her funds, and

in respect of his or her name should continue

to remain entered in the landRegistration

Department etc. and the name should be entered

if the same is not entered and the other

parties totallygave up their claimwith

respect thereto."

Then follow parts 1 to 4 in each of which certain properties are set out, and in respect of which, title of each of the four sets of the executants is acknowledged by the rest. Para 4, which relates to properties falling to the share of Nanhku, executant 8, commences with the declaration by the rest of the executants, including Amar Singh and Sonadhari, that Nanhku was the adopted son of Ramji and Patreja Kuer, that certain properties set out therein were exclusively acquired by Patreja Kuerand that Nanhku, as the adopted son of Ramji and Patreja Kuer, was exclusively entitled tothem on the death of Patreja, and' 'that "we, the executants Nos. 1 to 5, 6 and 7, and the heirs of executant No. 6 neither have nor shall have any claim, title or possession and connection inrespect thereof in any mannerand on any allegation". Following up the arrangement made in Paras I to 4, four schedules giving particulars of properties which were acknowledged tobe belonging to the four sets of' executants were appended to Ex. 1. As regards two houses,. ;one at Rajipur and the other in dispute, Schs. 3 and 4 both set out a half share in them as belonging to executants 6 and 7 and the other half as belonging to executant 8, i.e. Nanhku, in each of them.

As already stated, the fundamental premise on which the Division Bench proceeded to consider Ex. I was that there were three sets of executants, namely, those belonging to Lalji's branch, i.e., executants 1 to 3, those belonging to Raghunandan's branch i.e., executants 4 and 5, and the third set consisting of Amar Singh and Sonadhari executants 6 and 7, and Nanhku, executant 8. The second premise on which the Division Bench rested its entire reasoning was that whereas there were disputes between the three sets of executants, there were no disputes between Amar Singh, Sonadhari and Nankhu, that in fact the three of them acted in concert, and that therefore, one half share given to Nanhku in the house in dispute was altogether voluntarily givenwithout any anterior title and without any claim or dispute raised by Nanhku in, respect thereof. In our view, both the premises were incorrect rendering theconclusion drawn therefrom untenable.

it is true that Amar Singh had in 1898 purchased out of his own moneys the land on which the, suit house stands. It is 193 also true that Nanhku was adopted sometime. before the execution of Ex. 1, and therefore, on the date of its execution he could not have any valid claim enforceable in law any property belonging to Amar Singh andhis branch. But, as stated earlier, a dispute or a contention, the settlement ofwhich can constitute afamilyarrangement, need not be one which is actually sustainable in law. The harmony in a family can be unsettled even by competitive and rival claims which cannot be upheld in law. Therefore, if Amar Singh and the other executants or some of them were to challenge, for instance, the factum or thevalidity of Nanhku's adoption, or if notwithstanding his adoption, Nanhku were to make a claim in properties held by Amar Singh and his branch or if some of the executants were to claim that the 'family of Rajkumar was still a joint and undivided familyor that though the members of thefamilywere separate, theproperties held in the individual names of some of them including Reshmi Kuer and Patreja Kuerwere joint,there would be sufficient disputes to constitute a settlement of them a family arrangement. A claim, made by executants 1 to 5 that the properties held byReshmiKuer and Patreja Kuer were not their separate properties but-were joint family properties, liable to bepartitioned amongst all, was bound to affect both Amar Singh and Nanhku, If such a claim were to be persisted and dragged to a court of law there is no gainsaying that it would put into jeopardy not only the interests of Amar Singh and Nanhku but also the harmony of the family.

The recitals in Ex. I clearly show that whereas members of Lalji's branch were claiming that the family was still joint and undivided, and therefore, they had interest in all the properties irrespective of their standing in the names of particular individuals, Raghunandan and his son claimed that the members of the family were not joint andyet claimed share in all the properties including those standing in the names of Reshmi Kuer and Patreja Kuer. Thus the claims by executants '1 to 5 were definitely hostile to the interests of Amar Singh to ':the extent of the properties standing in the name of Reshmi Kuer and of Nanhku to the extent of the properties standing in the name of Patreja Kuer. The claims made by the branches of Lalji and Raghunandan sought to bring all the properties into hotch potch including those held by Resbmi Kuer and Patreja Kuer, thus, affecting the rights of Amar Singh and Nanhku in the different properties and not the same properties. Their interests, therefore, were not identical and there was thus no reason for them to act jointly. Indeed, there was no evidence whatsoever and nothing in Ex. I itself to show that they were acting in concert as assumed by the Division Bench.

13-1 S. C. India/71 194 It is true that the recitals in Ex. I do not expressly set out any conflict of claims between Amar Singhand Nanhku. Nevertheless, it is significant that in para 4 of Ex. I the executants found it necessary toinsert therein a declaration not onlyby executants1 to 5, butalso executants 6 and 7 that Nanhku was the adopted son of Ramji and Patreja Kuer, that on the death of Patreja Kuer he, as such adopted son, was absolutely entitled to the properties set out therein in addition to those which stood in the name of Patreja Kuer. If the adoption of Nankhu was accepted by all and was not made the subject matter of any doubt or dispute, there was no necessity of including such a declaration and in particular joining executants 6 and 7 in such a declaration. If Amar Singh and Nanhku were acting in concert why had Amar Singh and his son, Sonadhari as executants 6 and 7, to be joined as declarants to the adoption of Nanhku. Para 4 of Ex. I also shows that there were certain bonds and mortgage deeds standing in thename of Patreja Kuer which were acquired from out of the personal funds of Ramji. Such a statement had to be acknowledged in paragraph 4 presumably ,because rights in those bonds and deeds were not admitted to be the exclusive rights of Patreja. If those rights were to be treated as joint family property, as claimed by executants 1 to 5, Amar Singh would get a share in them and to that extent his interest must be said to be in conflict with that ofNanhku. A similar resultwould follow if properties standing in the name of RashmiKuer were to be treated as joint family properties. It would not, therefore, be correct to assume that in the disputes amongst thedifferent branches ofthe family. Nanhku and Amar Singh were acting in concert or that there' was no conflict of interest between them. In our judgment, the parties to Ex. I arrived at a settlement in view of claimsand cross claims by some against the others. Taken as a whole and in the light of the recitals and the statements in the operative part of the document indicating conflicts amongst the members of the family, the document represented an arrangement bona fide entered into, for settling existing or at any rate apprehended disputes, and therefore, satisfied the tests of a family arrangementlaid down in the decisions earlier referred to. In thisview Nanhkumust be said to have acquired a half share in the house in dispute under Ex. 1.

On the question of adverse possession by a co-sharer against another co-sharer, the law is fairly well settled. Adverse possession has to have the characteristics of adequacy, continuity and exclusiveness.The onus to establish these characteristics is on the adverse possessor.Accordingly, if a holder of title proves 195 that he too had been exercising during the currency of his title various acts of possession, then, the quality of those acts, even though they might not be sufficient to constitute adverse possession as against another, may be abundantly sufficient todestroy that adequacyand interruptthat exclusiveness and continuity which is demanded from a person challenging by possession the title which heholds.(see Kuthali Moothavar v. Paringati Kunharankutty(1). As between co-sharers, the possession of one cosharer is in law the possession ofall co-sharers. Therefore, to constitute adverse possession, ouster of the non-possessing cosharer has to be made out. As between them, therefore, theremust be evidence of open assertion of a hostile title coupled with exclusive possession and enjoyment by one of them to the knowledge of the other. (see Lakshmi Reddy v. Lakshmi Reddy(1) and also Mohammad Baqar v. Naim-un-Nisa Bibi.(3)) But, once the possession of a co-sharer has become adverse as a result of ouster, a mere assertion of a joint title by the dispossessed co-sharer would not interrupt the running of adverse possession. He must actually and effectively break up the exclusive possession of his co-sharer by reentry upon the property or by resuming possession in such a manneras itwas possible to do. (see Wuntakal Yalpi Chanabasavana Gowd v. Y. Mahabaleshwarappa(4)). Themere fact that a dispossessed co-sharer comes and stays for a few days as a guest isnot sufficient to interrupt the exclusiveness or the continuity of adverse possession ,so as not to extinguish the rights of the dispossessed co-sharer. (see Ammakannu Ammal v. Naravanaswami Mudaliar(5)). On this issue, the parties led considerable evidence,oral and documentary. On examination of that evidence, both the Trial Court and the learned Single Judge gave a concurrent finding that even if the possession by the respondents was adverse the appellant and his father had done acts of possession atvarious intervals which were sufficient to interrupt both the continuity and the exclusiveness of possession by the respondents.The Division Bench, however, did not agree with the concurrent finding on a reappraisal of the evidence. by it. It is not necessary for us to go into the details of that evidence once again as certain facts clearlyemerge out of the evidence toprevent the extinguishment of Nanhku's and the appellant's title in the property as a result of adverse possession by the respondents.

The principal facts which impressed the Division Benchwere (i) that though in the Demand Register of Patna Municipality for 1915-16 (Ex. E) Sonadhari and Baijnath were the only

(1) [1921] 48 I. A. 395, 404.

(3) A. I. R. 1956 S. C. 548.

(5) A. I. R. 1923 Mad. 633.

(2) [1957] S.C.R. 195, 202.

(4) [1955] 1 S. C. R. 131, 138. 196

persons named as occupiers, Nanhku had not taken steps to include his name, (2) that all throughout it was Sonadhari and Baijnath who paid the municipal taxes and Nanhku at no time paid his share of the taxes or his share in the cost of repairs and laying of a water pipe in the house, and (3) that though in his written statement in suit No. 33 of1933 Baijnath claimed that he was in exclusive possession of the house as he had paid Nanhku the proportionate price of his share, Nanhku did not take any steps to vindicate his title until he and his son filed the present suit in 1949 by which time the statutory period for adverse possession had already been completed.

There was, however, evidence (if Nanhku and his wife having stayedon different occasions in the house. But the Division Bench was of the view that such acts of possession were only casual and did not have the effect of interrupting the adverse possession of the respondents.

It needs to mention in this connection that Nanhku was all along residing in a village and not in Patna, Therefore, his acts of possession could only be when he came down from his village for some work to Patna. In 1915-1916,when Sonadhari got his name and that of Baijnath entered in the DemandRegister (Ex.E) it might be that Nanhku did not know that they had omitted his name. His half share in the house had been acknowledged in Ex. I only recently byAmar Singh and Sonadhari as well. Relations between the parties had not yet become unfriendly so as to make Nanbku suspect that his name would be deliberately omitted in the municipal records or that possession by Sonadhari and later on by Baijnath would be treated by them as adverse. Baijnath, no doubt,was using the whole house, but so long as his possession did not amount to ouster his possession would be that of both the co-sharers. If Baijnath used the entire house, except when Nanhku stayed in it during his occasional visits, Nanhku would naturally think that Baijnath should pay the taxes.It was not the case of the respondentsthat Baijnath ever demanded a share in the taxes or a share in the cost of repair and that such a demand was refused by Nanhku. The High Court on these facts was not right in observing that the title of Baijnath was already completed by adverse possession long before Baijnath filed his written statement in 1933, as mere use and enjoyment by him of the house, in the absence of such use amounting to ouster, would not make it adverse possession.

It was for the first time that in the written statement filed in 1933 Baijnath openly asserted his title to the whole of the house. Since that assertion was accompanied by the fact that he was in enjoyment of the whole housethat act would amount

197 to ouster and adverse possession would commence as from that date. Obviously, the earlier possession could not be tacked on tothe subsequent possession because the plea inthat very written statement was that Baijnath had paid off the price of Nanhku's share thereby implied admitting Nankhu's title to a half share in the house. Suit No. 33 of 1933, in which Baijnath filed the said written statement, was settled in 1941. In the compromise application filed by Nankhu and Baijnath, both of them stated that they wereresiding in that house. That assertion by Nanhku was never disputed by Baijnath.

But apart from that assertion there was the fact that Nanhku had no other place to reside in Patna. His case was that whenever he visited Patna he used to stay in the house in dispute. Apart from that assertion being natural, his evidence in that connection was corroborated by Prabhu Narain, P.W. 4, an Advocate residing in the neighbourhood. The Division Bench brushed aside his evidence without giving any adequate reason although it bad been accepted byboth the Trial Court and the learned Single Judge. In the light of this evidence itis notpossible to say that all throughout the period from 1933 till the statutory period for adverse possession was completed Nanhku had not stayed in the house at any time. Respondent herself admittedthat on suit No. 33 of 1933 beingsettled, relations between Nanhku and Baijnath became friendly. If that be so, it was natural that Nankhu would stay in the housewhenever be visited Patna in 1941 and thereafter.

The Municipal Survey Khasra (Ex. 2), dated December 19, 1933 mentions Nanhku along with Sonadhari and Baijnath as owners of the house. Since this entry was made after Baijnath had made a hostile claim to the entire house inthe written statement filed in suit No. 33 of 1933 on September 16, 1933, the entry must presumably have been made at the instance of Nanhku. Such an act on his Partwould be a clear assertion of his title in the house. Under the Bihar and Orissa Municipal Survey Act, 1 of 1920,beforesuch khasrawas finalised it had to be published and objections to it, if any, had to be invited and disposed of. No objection was ever raised by Baijnath to the said khasra. It is surprising that Baijnath did not resist the entry in the khasra although he had made a claim to the whole of the property only three months before the date ofthe khasra. That indicates that his claim *as merely acounterblast against Nanhku's suit.

The view of the Division Bench that the occasional putting up by Nanhku and his wife in the disputed house was merely casualand was. in the nature of visits as guests of the respondents 198

cannot be accepted. Such stay,however occasional, would.not be casual as it was accompaniedby anopen assertion of his title as evidenced by the khasra (Ex. 2). It could not also be that he stayed in the house as the guest of the respondents because after he filed the suit in 1933 and until it was settled, his relations with Baijnath could not have been friendly. These acts on the part of Nanhku Were ample enough to interrupt the continuity and the exclusiveness of possession by Baijnath.

The Division Bench also relied on a sale deed (Ex. C) dated October 12, 1933, executed by Baijnath and Tarkeshwar in favourof one Kamalnain Pandey. The High Court appears to have taken the view that, the land sold under Ex. C appertained to for was part of the land on which Amar Singh had put up the disputed house, and that although Baijnath and Tarkeshwar sold part of that land, no objection was taken at any time to such a sale by Nanhku. The recitals in Ex. C show that the land, sold under Ex. C.was jointly purchased on January20, 1898 by. Amar Singh and one Gajadhar Singh for construction of a house thereon.Amar Singh had a share in the said land to the extent of I katha 15 dhurs while his c0-purchaser had a share of 2 kathas 15 dhurs.The recitals further show that Amar Singh's original intention in purchasing the land was to build a house thereon. He appears to have given up that idea as till this sale took place the land was lying waste and unutilised. It is important to note that this sale was forI katha 10 dhurs,out of 1 katha 15 dhurs which was the share ofAmar Singh. This land obviously could not be the land on which the house indispute was built, for, if that was so, Baijnath could not have ,sold away I katha 10 dhurs out of the total extent of katha 15 dhurs to which Amar Singh was entitled. The house could not have stood on 5 dhurs only. Therefore, the land sold under Ex. C was a land different from the one on which the disputed house was situate.This conclusion is also borne out by the description of thesold land in the schedule to Ex. C where its northern boundary is described as follows:

"North : Parti (waste) land thereafter the house of us, the executants."

This description shows that between the disputed house and the land sold under Ex. C there was to the north of it some waste .land.The land sold under Ex. C being different land, the High Court was not right in relying on thatsale deed to prove adverse possession on the ground at Nanhku never took objection to the said sale. He could not, as this land had nothing to do with the housein dispute. Besides the evidencediscussed above, there was other evidence. But the incidents therein describedwere irrelevant onthe question of adverse possession asthey took 199 place in 1948 and thereafter, that is to say, a longtime after title by adverse possession would have been completed if such adverse possessionwere to be accepted as established. In view of the evidence discussed above the Division Beach was not justified in interfering with the finding of fact concurrently given by the Trial Court and the learned Single Judge that the adverse, possession by Baijnath which commenced from 1933 wassufficiently interrupted by acts of possession by Nanhku, and therefore, his title was not extinguished by adverse possession. In the view we take on both the questions, the appealmust be allowed and the judgment and decree of the Division Bench must be set aside and the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court and upheld by the learned Single Judge must be restored. The respondents will pay to the appellant his costs all throughout.

G.C. Appeal allowed. 200
**********
CROSS CITATION
1969 SCC (3) 447
1970 SCR (2) 903

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1369 of 1966. Appealby special leave from the judgment andorder dated September 11,1962 of the Allahabad High Court in Civil Revision No. 653 of 1959. 904 G. N. Dikshit, O. P. Saini and Lakshmi Chand Tyagi, for the appellant.

J. P. Goyal and S. N. Singh, for the respondents. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

Hegde, J. This appeal by special leave arises from an arbitration proceeding. The appellant, the 1st respondent and one Sukh Lalwho died during thependency of these proceedings referred their disputes to five arbitrators as per the written agreement executed by them on September 9, 1955.Arbitrators made their award on October 11, 1955. They duly served on the parties to the arbitration agreement, notice of making and significantaward. The award was thereafter registered. On November 1, 1955 the appellant filed a suit in the court of Munsiff Hawali Meerut praying that the award in question be made a rule of the court and decree passed in accordance with the same. It is said that the notice taken in thatsuit could not be personally served onthe defendants as they refused to accept the same. That fact was reported to the court by the process server as per hisreport dated 19-11-1955. Thereafter the defendants filed their written statement on February 3, 1956 wherein they challenged validity of the award on various grounds. They contended that the award was vitiated because ofmisconduct onthe part of the arbitrators inasmuch as the arbitrators decided the disputes referred to them primarily on the basis of their personal knowedge. They also contended that the arbitration agreement wasobtained from them by exercise of undue influence. Their further contention was thatthe subject matterof the dispute could not under law be referred to, arbitration in view of the provisions of U.P. Act 1 of 1951. It was also contended by them that the suit was barred by time.

The trial court accepted the contention of the defendants that the arbitrators were guilty of misconduct. Dealing with the issue of undue influence, it came to the conclusion that the arbitrationagreement was not executed by the defendants according to their free will. But it heldthat the plea of undue influence was not made out. It upheld the contention of the defendants that the subject matter of the dispute could not have been referred to arbitration inview of the provisions of U.P. Act I of 1951.

In appeal the learned Civil Judge reversed the decree of the trial court. While agreeing with the trial court that the arbitrators had used their personal knowledgein deciding the disputes referred to them, that court held that under the terms of the agreement, it was open to the arbitrators to decide the disputes in question on the basis of their personal knowledge. Dealing with

905 the question of the arbitrators' competence to decide the dispute, thatcourt held that the questionwhether the dispute came within the scope of U.P. Act 1 of 1951 or not is a question of law and the same could have been referred to arbitration. It went further and held that as the defendants had not taken their objection. to the award withinthe time prescribed, the same could not havebeen entertained by the trial court.

The High Court in revision differed from the appellate court on all the points mentioned above. It came to the conclusion that the arbitration agreement did not specifically empower the arbitrators to decide the disputes referred to them on the basis of their personal knowledge; they having utilized their personal knowledgein deciding the disputes,they were guilty of legal misconduct and consequently the award made by them is vitiated. Italso came to the conclusion that the disputes in question could not have been referred to arbitration in view of the provisions of U.P. Act 1 of 1951. It overruled the decision of the appellate court that the defendants had not taken their objections to the award within the prescribed time. We may at this stage mention that the contention that the suit was barred by time was not pressed before the trial court or in any other court.

Thereis no basis for the finding of the appellate court that the objection taken by the defendants to the award was barred by time. As seen earlier, the suit to make the award a rule of the court was brought by one of the parties to the arbitration agreement and not by any arbitrator. The plaint filed does not disclose that the award given hadbeen produced along with it. There was some controversy as _to whether that award was produced along withthe plaint. There is no need to go into that question as we shall presently see. It is not said that along with the plaint copy, a copy of the award had been sent to the defendants. Nor is it said that notice of the suit sent to the defendants mentioned the fact that the award had been filed into court along with the plaint. Art. 158 of the Limitation Act, 1908gives to party 30 days time for applying to set aside an award or get an award remitted for reconsideration from the date of the service of the notice of filing of the award. There is absolutely no proof in this case that a notice of the filing of the awardinto court had ever been given to the defendants. Hence the objections taken by the defendants to the award could not have been rejected on the round of limitation. Now coming to the question of misconduct on the part of the arbitrators, that allegation is founded on the fact that the arbitrators decided the disputes referred to them on the basis of their 906 personal knowledge. That allegation has beenaccepted as true both by the trial court as well as the appellate court. In fact the award says :

"We gave our consideration to the entire dispute which is in full knowledge of us, the panchas".

Therefore there is hardly any room to contest the allegation that the arbitrators had decided the disputesreferred to them primarily ,on the basis of theirpersonal knowledge. Under these circumstances all that we have to see is whether the appellate court was right in concluding that under the arbitration agreement, the arbitrators had been empowered to decidethe disputes referred to them on the basis of their personal knowledge.

The material portion of the arbitration agreement which is in Hindi translated into English reads thus :

"All the panchas and Sarpanchas are residents

of village Keli Pargana Sarawa. The power is

given to them that the saidPanchas and

Sarpanch, whatever decision, in whatever

manner will give in relation to ourland

described below, whatever land may be given to

any party or whatever party may be decided to

be the tenant of the entire land, whatever

compensation they may decide to be given to

any party, whatever decision they willgive

that will be final and acceptable andthey

will have the right to inform us of their

decision, unanimous or of majority and get the

same registered and we will fully complywith

their decision."

This agreement does not empower the arbitrators either specifically or by necessary implication to decide the disputes referred to them on the basis of their personal knowledge. The recital inthat agreement that the arbitrators may decide the disputes referredto them in "whatever manner" they think does not mean that they can decidethose disputes on the basis of their personal knowledge. The proceedings before the arbitrators are quasi-judicialproceedings. They must be conducted in accordance with the principles of natural justice. The parties to the submission may be in the dark as regards the personal knowledge of the arbitrators. There may be misconceptionsor wrong assumptions in the mind of the arbitrators. If the parties are not given opportunity to correct those misconceptions or wrongassumptions, ,-rave injustice may result. It is no body's case that the parties to the submission were informed about the nature of the personal knowledge, the arbitrators had and that theywere given opportunity to correct any misconception or wrong assumption. Further in the present case there were asmany as five arbitrators. It is 907 not known whether the, award was made on the basis of the personal knowledge of all of them or only some of them. Arbitration is a reference of a dispute for hearing in a judicial manner. It is true that parties to an agreement of reference may include in it such clauses as they think fit unless prohibited by law. It is normally an implied term of an arbitration agreement that the arbitratorsmust decide the dispute in accordance with the ordinary law-see Chandris v. Isbrandtsen Moller Co. Inc(1). That rule can be departed from only if specifically provided for in the submission. The appellate, court, in our opinion, hasmisread the arbitration agreement and hence it erroneously came to the conclusion that the arbitrators had been empowered to decide the dispute on the basis of their personal knowledge. It was contended on behalf of the appellant that in exercise of its powers under s. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the High Court could not have corrected the erroneous interpretation placed by the appellate court as to the scope of the arbitration agreement. We have not thought it necessary to go into that question as, in our opinion, the decision reached by the High Court is an eminently just one. Hence we do not feel called upon in exercise of our discretionary power under Art. 136 of the Constitution to interfere with the decision of the High Court. In view of our above conclusion, there is no need to go into the question whether the subject matter of the disputes could have been referred to arbitration.

In the result this appeal fails and the same is dismissed with cost.

Appeal dismissed.

V.P.S.

(1) 11951] K.B. 249. 908
**********
CROSS CITATION
2016 AIR (SC) 714
HEADNOTE
FLAT ALLOTMENT / SERVICE & LABOUR LAWS
Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA) constructed flats for lower and middle income groups - Central Bank of India took possession of land and ten such buildings with intention of housing the families of 200 employees - Bank issuing circular regarding policy of allotment of flats to class III & IV employees - Allotment of flat not as of right or condition of service - Discretion of management absolute - Bank stopped allotting flats with the view to redevelop, by demolishing flats - Eviction notice issued to occupants of the flats under provision of Public Premises (Eviction of unauthorised occupants) Act 1971 - Proceeding contested before Estate Officer failed - Appeal failed before Appellant Authority - Writ petition before High Court dismissed. Held employees have no vested right as allotment was not the part of their condition of service.
HELD
There is no doubt that none of the employees have any right to retain the allotted premises, more particularly since the allotment was not a part of their condition of service. This is quite clear from the Circulars dated 15th September, 1982 and 25th May, 1983. That apart, no right based submission was made before us. That being the position, it is really difficult to appreciate the basis on which the employees are claiming an entitlement to continue in the allotted premises. (Para 18)

Bank taking land from MHADA for Housing middle/lower income group employees - As a redevelopment plan, Bank intending to demolish the same for constructing luxury apartment for managerial staff - Said purpose, allegedly, contrary to lease agreement with MHADA. Held many clauses referred in lease agreement, do not confer any right on employee to raise the issue of violation of provision of lease deed. This is not a public interest litigation. Time granted to employees to vacate the flat.
HELD
The second argument advanced by the employees is really a different facet of the first argument and since we do not find any basis at all for the grievance of the employees against either the MHADA or against the Bank, we reject this submission as well. (Para 21)

Since the employees have been residing in the flats for a considerable period of time, we grant them time to vacate the premises allotted to them on or before 31st March, 2016. We expect the employees to peacefully vacate the allotted premises and if there is some difficulty in this regard, the Bank is at liberty to approach the High Court for the implementation of its order of eviction. (Para 23)

Damages for illegal occupation of flats - As a redevelopment plan, Bank intending to demolish flats constructed for Housing middle/lower income group employee so as to construct luxury apartment for managerial staff - Employees, having no vested right, refusing to vacate. Held, Court would not direct them to pay damages as they were pursuing their remedies before High Court and Apex Court. (Para 24)

Ed.: Court emphasised the need for Institutionalized alternative dispute resolution mechanism in order to avoid protracted litigation. In this case, though efforts were made to settle dispute but no institutional mechanism was invited to assist in the settlement process.

CASES REFERRED
1. K. Srinivas Rao v. D.A. Deepa [JT 2013 (3) SC 97] (Para 3)

2. Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. v. Cherian Varkey Construction Co. (P) Ltd. [JT 2010 (7) SC 616] (Para 3)

3. Salem Advocate Bar Assn. (II) v. Union of India [JT 2005 (6) SC 486] (Para 3)

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.

1. The proceedings in these petitions as indeed the proceedings in the Bombay High Court (out of which the present petitions have arisen) indicate a clear need for encouraging an amicable settlement process, preferably through mediation, in which the services of a mediator well-versed in the art, science and technique of mediation may be taken advantage of. The alternative, of course, is protracted litigation which may not be the best alternative for the contesting parties or for a society that requires expeditious justice delivery.

2. In his Foreword written on 12th April, 2011 to the first edition of "Mediation Practice & Law - The path to successful dispute resolution" written by Mr. Sriram Panchu, Senior Advocate and Mediator, Mr. Fali S. Nariman, a Senior Advocate of this Court and a respected jurist, writes:

"[T]he same subject matter of disputation between two parties can be dealt with in two different ways, not necessarily exclusive: first, by attempting to resolve a dispute in such a way that the parties involved win as much as possible and lose as little as possible through the intervention of a third party steeped in the techniques of mediation; and second, (failing this) the dispute would be left to be resolved by each party presenting its case before a disinterested third party with an expectation of a binding decision on the merits of the case: a win-all lose-all, final determination".

2.1. The second alternative may not be the best alternative, as already mentioned by us.

3. The decision rendered by the High Court which is under challenge before us states that efforts were made to have the disputes between the contesting parties settled but it is clear that no institutional mechanism was invited to assist in the settlement process. The proceedings before us also indicate that several efforts were made to encourage the contesting parties to arrive at a settlement, and at one point of time the parties did reach an interim arrangement but that could not fructify into a final settlement only because of the absence of an intervention through an institutional mechanism. Appreciating this, this Court has consistently encouraged the settlement of disputes through an institutionalized alternative dispute resolution mechanism and there are at least three significant decisions rendered by this Court on the subject. They are: (i) Salem Advocate Bar Assn. (II) v. Union of India [JT 2005 (6) SC 486] (ii) Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. v. Cherian Varkey Construction Co. (P) Ltd. [JT 2010 (7) SC 616 : 2010 (8) SCC 24] (iii) K. Srinivas Rao v. D.A. Deepa [JT 2013 (3) SC 97 : 2013 (5) SCC 226]

4. That apart this Court has, on several occasions, referred disputes for amicable settlement through the Mediation Centre functioning in the Supreme Court premises itself and Mediation Centres across the country in a large variety of disputes including (primarily) matrimonial disputes. In spite of the encouragement given by this Court, for one reason or another, institutionalized mediation has yet to be recognized as an acceptable method of dispute resolution provoking Mr. Fali S. Nariman to comment in the same Foreword in the context of the Afcon's decision that "Mediation must stand on its own; its success judged on its own record, un-assisted by Judges."

5. With this prologue, it is necessary to state the facts of the dispute before us. The Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA) had constructed some buildings for the lower and middle income groups in a complex known as Samata Nagar, Kandivli, Mumbai. Each building had twenty flats. The Central Bank of India (for short 'the Bank') took possession of the land and ten such buildings on 16th August, 1982 with the intention of housing the families of a total of 200 employees. Pursuant thereto, the Bank issued Circulars on 15th September, 1982 and 25th May, 1983 relating to the policy of allotment of the flats to its Class III and Class IV employees.

6. The Circular dated 15th September, 1982 provided that the flats would be allotted to employees under the jurisdiction of the Central Office, Bombay Main Office and the Bombay Metropolitan Regional Office. It also provided that the allotment would be as per the absolute discretion of the management and that the facility of allotment was not given as a condition of service nor did any right vest in any staff member.

7. The Circular dated 25th May, 1983 made some minor modifications in the eligibility for allotment but the sum and substance, as far as the present proceedings are concerned, remained more or less the same.

8. Based on the above broad principles, the allotment of flats was made to its employees by the Bank. We are told that presently, about 50 families are living in these flats, the rest being vacant.

9. As earlier agreed upon by MHADA and the Bank, on 29th July, 1994 MHADA leased out the land underneath the buildings to the Bank for a period of 90 years. Some of the salient conditions mentioned in the Lease Deed read as follows:-

"(h) Not to assign, sublet, underlet or otherwise transfer in any other manner whatsoever including parting with the possession of the whole or any part of the said land or its interest thereunder or benefit of this lease to any person or persons or change the user of the said land or any part thereof without the previous written permission of the Authority.

(i) To use the said land and the tenements in the said buildings constructed thereon for the purpose of residence of its employees as service quarter only and for no other purpose.

(l) Not to make any excavation upon any part of the said land without the previous consent of the Authority in writing first obtained, except for the purpose of repairing renovation or rebuilding the existing structure standing on the said land or utilization of permissible F.S.I. if any as per Development control rules/regulations on the plot leased to the lessee which is a part of a layout of village Poisar at Borivali Bombay."

10. Apparently with a view to redevelop the plot by demolishing the buildings purchased by the Bank, it appears that the Bank stopped allotting the flats from sometime in 1997 onwards and on or about 15th June, 2007 it floated a proposal for redevelopment of the plot by demolishing the buildings. The proposal for redevelopment necessitated the eviction of the employees from the flats occupied by them. Therefore, sometime in July 2007 eviction notices were issued to the employees-allottees under the provisions of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 (for short "the Act").

11. Some of the employees contested the proceedings and eventually an order was passed by the Estate Officer appointed under the Act in 2008 rejecting all their submissions and they were directed to vacate the public premises within 15 days of the date of publication of the order failing which they were liable to be evicted, if need be, by the use of such force as may be necessary. The employees were also ordered to pay damages with effect from 15th June, 2007 till the date of handing over of peaceful possession of the public premises to the Bank failing which the amount would be recovered as arrears of land revenue.

12. Feeling aggrieved, the employees preferred appeals under Section 9 of the Act which came to be dismissed by the City Civil Court in Bombay in June 2008. The Appellate Authority dismissed all the appeals with costs but stayed the order of eviction for a period of seven days to enable the employees to approach the Bombay High Court.

13. The employees then approached the High Court by filing Writ Petition Nos.4417 of 2008 and 5589 of 2008 which were heard by a learned Single Judge and dismissed by a judgment and order dated 19th December, 2008 (impugned before us).

14. The employees made the following four submissions before the High Court:

(i) MHADA had leased the land to the Bank for building residential quarters for Class IV employees;

(ii) the premises were part of the conditions of services of the Class IV employees which could not be taken away by issuing a quit notice;

(iii) The purpose for which the Bank required vacant buildings was for demolishing them in order to build new buildings for housing their managerial staff; and

(iv) The notice for eviction did not spell out the reasons for evicting the petitioners.

15. Each of these contentions was rejected by the High Court but before us, learned counsel for the petitioners effectively pressed only the 1st and 3rd contentions, being inter-linked.

16. At this stage, we must point out that the High Court has observed that several adjournments were granted to the parties to negotiate a settlement. However, the parties failed to arrive at any settlement and it is for this reason that the High Court was compelled to deliver judgment. Before this Court also several efforts were made to arrive at some kind of an amicable settlement including providing alternative accommodation to the employees or making monthly payment to them in lieu of the allotted premises. However, for one reason or another despite best efforts made by learned counsel for the parties, no settlement could be arrived at.

17. At one stage, the following interim arrangement was broadly accepted by both the sides as noted in the order dated 29th November, 2010 but even that interim arrangement did not fructify into a settlement between the parties and it is for this reason that we too have been compelled to decide on the correctness or otherwise of the judgment and order passed by the High Court.

"(i) 49 employees (sub staff) are occupying units spread over several buildings. Though most of the units are vacant, as some of the units are occupied, the Bank is not in a position to demolish the buildings and take up development work which it proposes. In the circumstances, out of the 49 employees, those who are allottees of quarters, will be shifted by the Bank to one or two buildings so that the Bank will be able to demolish the other buildings and take up the development.

(ii) It is made clear that if any family members of deceased allottees (who have been given compassionate appointment) are continuing in such units, they will not be entitled to alternative accommodation. Such occupants will have to vacate.

(iii) The Bank will, in the meanwhile, continue its efforts to identify alternative premises for those who are being shifted to the two buildings."

18. There is no doubt that none of the employees have any right to retain the allotted premises, more particularly since the allotment was not a part of their condition of service. This is quite clear from the Circulars dated 15th September, 1982 and 25th May, 1983. That apart, no right based submission was made before us. That being the position, it is really difficult to appreciate the basis on which the employees are claiming an entitlement to continue in the allotted premises.

19. It was submitted before us that the land was leased out by the MHADA to the Bank for the purposes of housing middle income group employees or lower income group employees. As a result of the redevelopment plan, the Bank was intending to demolish the buildings and to construct luxury apartments for their managerial level officers, contrary to the lease agreement with MHADA. Assuming this to be so, if there is a violation of the provisions of the lease deed between the MHADA and the Bank, it is really for them to settle their differences, if any. The employees do not come into the picture at all.

20. The various clauses in the lease agreement that have been referred to do not in any manner involve the employees and for them to raise an issue about any alleged violation of the provisions of the lease deed is totally inconsequential. This is not a public interest litigation where the rule relating to standing can be relaxed. We are therefore not inclined to accept this submission of the employees that since the MHADA had leased out the land to the Bank for housing middle income group or lower income group employees, the Bank is disentitled from demolishing the buildings and constructing luxury apartments for their managerial level officers.

21. The second argument advanced by the employees is really a different facet of the first argument and since we do not find any basis at all for the grievance of the employees against either the MHADA or against the Bank, we reject this submission as well.

22. Under these circumstances, we find no merit in these petitions and therefore decline to grant special leave to appeal and dismiss these petitions but with no order as to costs.

23. Since the employees have been residing in the flats for a considerable period of time, we grant them time to vacate the premises allotted to them on or before 31st March, 2016. We expect the employees to peacefully vacate the allotted premises and if there is some difficulty in this regard, the Bank is at liberty to approach the High Court for the implementation of its order of eviction.

24. We may also note that the Bank has demanded damages from the employees both who are still working with the Bank and those who have retired. In our opinion, since the employees were pursuing their remedies before the High Court as well as before this Court, we do not think it appropriate to direct them to pay any damages to the Bank for the use and occupation of the premises allotted nor do we think it appropriate to permit the Bank to recover the damages awarded against the employees.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2007 AIR (SC) 1401
2007 (3) SCR 545
APPEARANCES
Mr. Sunil Gupta, Senior Advocate, Mr. Jatin Zaveri, Advocate with him for the Appellant.
Mr. R. Venkataramani, Senior advocate, Mr. Nikhilesh Ramchandran and Mr. Ashok Panigrahi, Advocates, with him for the Respondents.
HEADNOTE
Arbitration
Arbitration Act, 1940
Sections 14 ,20 and 31 -Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 - Section 20 Arbitration award -Application for making the award a rule of the court - Territorial jurisdiction of the court - Determination - Agreement between appellant and respondent with regard to development of certain land and construction there on- Land located in New Delhi - Owner of the land residing in Faridabad, Haryana - Developer company having its registered office in New Delhi - Disputes between the parties - Arbitrator making an award notwithstanding the pendency of the application under Section 20 made by the appellant land owner in the High Court - Respondent developer making an application under Section 14 in the Faridabad court for making the award the rule of the court -Whether the said court has the juris-diction to entertain the application and make the award a rule of the court. Held Section 20 of CPC is attracted and since the appellant resided at Faridabad and the dispute involved rendition of accounts, the court at Faridabad had the jurisdiction to entertain the application under Section 14 to make the award the rule of the court.
HELD
We are of the view that at the relevant time the appellant resided at Faridabad. He resided at Faridabad when the contract was made. Under the contract, the parties agreed to refer all disputes to the Faridabad court. Apart from the residence, we are also concerned with the place of accrual of the cause of action. In the present case, a bare reading of the agreement indicates that it is an agreement to develop. The appellant remains the owner, the Developer remains the contractor. The Developer is the financer. The appellant is the owner of an asset. The contractor/ Developer agrees to exploit that asset on behalf of the owner. The Developer funds the scheme. The building plans remained in the name of the owner. The D.D.A. informs the owner regarding revocation of the building plan. The owner files the writ petition challenging the revocation. The contractor is paid consideration in terms of a part of the property. In the circumstances, it cannot be said that this case is similar to a suit for land. One cannot look at para 16 alone in isolation. On the other hand, with open eyes, theparties had entered into the contract, they had agreed to refer all disputes to an arbitrator at Faridabad and they had agreed that the Faridabad court alone shall have jurisdiction. In a matter of this kind, it can- not be said that the claim is similar to a suit for land. A housing complex has to be constructed at the site. When dispute arises, it will not be confined only to immovable property. Such disputes also require accounts to be maintained. The disputes also involve rendition of accounts. In the circumstances, in our view, section 20 CPC alone is attracted. Therefore, in our view, the High Court was right in holding that the Faridabad court had jurisdiction to make the Award the rule of the court. (Para 16)

Arbitration Act, 1940

Sections 8 , 14 to 17 and 20 - Arbitration - Ex parte award - Validity - Distinction and applicability of Sections 8 and 20 - Reference made to Arbitrator on 24-8-1992 - On the date fixed for hearing arbitrator not entering presence - However award made after fourteen months that too after one party moved an application under Section 20 in the High Court - Trial court making the award rule of the court by an ex parte order - Validity. Without going into the merits held that the order of the trial court was not sustainable. Matter accordingly directed to be restored to file of the trial court for re-examination as to whether the award given by the arbitrator should or should not be made rule of the court.
HELD


We have also gone through the Award. We do not wish to express any opinion on the merits, however, the fact remains that the arbitrator entered upon the reference on 24.8.1992. He fixed 06 passed by the trial court at Faridabad making Award dated 29.3.1994 the rule of the court. Consequently, we direct restoration of the matter to the file of the Court of Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Faridabad in Case No. 7 instituted on 12.4.1994 titled M/s Chopra Land Developers Pvt. Ltd. v. Jatinder Nath and Anr.. We may clarify that the trial court will proceed on the basis that it has territorial jurisdiction to decide the application made by the Developer under sections 14 to 17 of the Act. The said application will be decided on merits alone in accordance with law. In other words, the trial court will re-examine the question on merits as to whether the Award given by the arbitrator on 29.3.1994 should or should not be made the rule of the court. The trial court will have to decide whether to extend the period for making the Award or not, whether to supercede the reference or not. The trial court will proceed in accordance with law. Any observation on the merits of the case mentioned hereinabove shall not be treated as opinion of this Court. Further, the trial court will proceed on the basis that it has territorial jurisdiction to decide the above matter. (Para 17)

CASES REFERRED
1. Union of India v. Surjeet Singh Atwal [AIR 1970 SC 189] (Para 8)


KAPADIA, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. This civil appeal arises from the final order dated 19.4.2006 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh allowing Civil Revision No. 4877/96.

3. The short question which arises for determination in this civil appeal is whether the Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Faridabad was right in dismissing the application filed under section 14 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (for short "the Act") filed by M/s Chopra Land Developers Pvt. Ltd.
("the Developer") on the basis of Award dated 29.3.1994 given by the Arbitrator in the above court for want of jurisdiction.

4. The Developer is a private limited company having its registered office at Saket, New Delhi. On 16.3.1990 an Agreement was entered into by the Developer with one Jatinder Nath (appellant herein). At that time, the appellant was residing at Faridabad. Under the above agreement, the Developer agreed to construct a housing complex on a plot bearing No. G-13, Saket, New Delhi. Under the said Agreement, the Developer agreed to finance the construction from its own resources. Clauses 11, 20 and 21 of the said agreement read as follows:

"11. In case of any dispute arising between the parties in this respect, the matter shall be referred to the Sole Arbitrator for his valuable decision and his decision shall be final and binding on both the parties.

20. That in case of any dispute arising between the parties in respect of these presents, the same shall be referred for arbitration to the sole Arbitrator. Shri Damodar Sharma, 5-N/35, NIT Faridabad shall be the sole Arbitrator and the decision shall be binding on both the parties.

21. The agreement has been entered into between the parties at Faridabad and the Faridabad Courts only shall have the jurisdiction in case of any dispute between the parties to the said agreement."

In terms of the said agreement, when the dispute arose between the parties, the appellant herein requested for a reference to the named Arbitrator. This was vide letter dated 20.8.1992. The Arbitrator entered upon the reference on 24.8.1992. He fixed the hearing on 5.9.1992 on which date the appellant remained present at the venue of arbitration. However, neither the arbitrator nor the Developer was present. Suddenly after fourteen months, the arbitrator purported to act. He fixed the matter for hearing on 20.2.1994. Since the entire matter was pending before the Delhi High Court which was moved by the appellant herein under section 20, the arbitrator was requested not to proceed. Despite the request, the arbitrator proceeded to give his Award (ex parte). This was on 29.3.1994.

6. To complete the chronology of events, it may be pointed out that the Developer (first respondent herein) filed an application under section 14 of the Act for filing the Award in the court of Additional Civil Judge (Sr. Div.), Faridabad (for short "the trial court"). Notice of the said application was also given to the appellant herein. The appellant herein appeared and filed his objections. He objected to the jurisdiction of the trial court. According to the appellant, the suit land stood located in Saket, New Delhi and, therefore, the trial court had no jurisdiction to pass the decree in terms of the said Award. This was the basic objection raised by the appellant before us. Apart from his objection on territorial jurisdiction, the appellant also submitted before the trial court that the Arbitrator had issued notice dated 24.8.1992 fixing the date of hearing on 5.9.1992. However, when his advocate reached the residence of the Arbitrator on the date fixed, neither the Arbitrator nor the Developer had turned up. The appellant also contended before the trial court that the Award was not made within the period of four months from entering upon the reference and, therefore, the Arbitrator had become functus officio. He further pointed out to the trial court that an application under section 20 of the Act has also been filed in the High Court by him for filing the arbitration agreement in court. The appellant submitted that despite raising the above objections before the Arbitrator, the Arbitrator proceeded to pass an ex parte Award dated 29.3.1994. The appellant further pointed out that the Developer had filed a suit for permanent injunction in the Court of Senior Sub-Judge, Delhi and that the Developer had sought intervention of the civil court for adjudication of the dispute and, in the circumstances, the Arbitrator could not have made an ex parte Award dated 29.3.1994. According to the appellant, the said ex parte Award passed by the Arbitrator was in violation of the provisions of the Act; that it was non est, and, therefore, the same could not be made rule of the Court.

7. The trial court on the basis of the above pleadings framed several issues. Two of the six issues were, whether Award dated 29.3.1994 was non est as the Arbitrator had become functus officio and whether the trial
court had no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the matter since the suit lands are located in Saket, New Delhi.

8. By impugned judgment dated 24.9.1996, the trial court held that in view of section 31(4) of the Act, since the land in question stood located in Saket, New Delhi and since the appellant herein is the resident of Delhi and since the Developer was carrying on business in Delhi the trial court had no territorial jurisdiction to pass the decree in terms of the Award. The trial court rejected the contention of the Developer that the subject matter of the reference was the contract between the parties; that under the contract, the dispute, if any, was to be referred for arbitration in Faridabad; that under the contract, the dispute was referable to the sole arbitrator whose decision was to bind both the parties. The trial court also rejected the contention of the Developer that the agreement was entered into between the parties at Faridabad and that the Faridabad court alone had the jurisdiction to decide the above dispute. The trial court also rejected the contention of the Developer that on the date of execution of the agreement, the appellant herein was residing in Faridabad. On the merits of the case, the trial court found that the appellant herein had moved a petition under section 20 of the Act on 14.10.1993 in the Delhi High Court which was registered as Suit No. 2482/93 wherein it was prayed that an independent arbitrator be appointed and the matter be referred for arbitration. On 14.10.1993 the Arbitrator had not made the award. On 14.10.1993 the period of four months had expired. The trial court found that after the institution of petition under section 20 of the Act on 14.10.1993, the arbitrator, suddenly, after a lapse of almost
fourteen months from the date of his entering upon the reference, made an ex parte Award against the appellant on 29.3.1994. According to the trial court, though the agreement (exhibit P-1) stood executed at Faridabad, the validity of that agreement and the dispute arising therefrom have to be decided in the civil court at Delhi since the property in question stood located in Saket, New Delhi. According to the trial court, the Developer had moved an application under section 14 of the Act on 12.4.1994, by that application, the Developer sought a decree from the trial court at Faridabad in terms of the ex parte Award. On 12.4.1994, according to the trial court, the appellant herein was residing in Delhi, he was served with the summons at his residential address in Delhi coupled with the fact that the suit property was in Delhi and, therefore, the trial court at Faridabad had no territorial jurisdiction to entertain and try the Developer's application under section 14 of the Act. According to the trial court, there was one more reason for saying that it had no territorial jurisdiction. According to the trial court the agreement (exhibit P-1), pertained to immovable property at Saket and when a dispute arose between the parties, the appellant herein had moved the Delhi High Court under section 20 of the Act in which the address of the appellant was shown as G-13, Saket, New Delhi. The trial court also look into account one more circumstance, namely, that the Developer had instituted Civil Suit No. 945/92 against the appellant herein. In that suit, the Developer had asked for a decree for permanent injunction. In that suit the appellant herein was the defendant. In that suit, the address of the appellant as defendant was also shown as G-13, Saket, New Delhi. In the circumstances, the trial court held that the Developer had invoked the territorial jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court much prior to his application under section 14 of the Act to the trial court herein on 12.4.1994. In the circumstances, the trial court held that the proviso to section 16 CPC was not applicable and that the application filed by the Developer under section 14 of the Act dated 12.4.1994 should have been instituted in the Delhi Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the suit property stood located. In the circumstances, it was held by the trial court that clause 21 of the agreement conferring jurisdiction to the Faridabad court cannot be implemented. The trial court observed that since the appellant had moved the Delhi High Court under section 20 of the Act for appointment of a new arbitrator in the year 1993 and since that application was prior to 12.4.1994 and since that application was anterior to the reference, the appellant's application under section 20 of the Act fell within the purview of section 31(4) of the Act. According to the trial court, since a petition under section 20 of the Act was pending prior to 12.4.1994 in the Delhi High Court, the Developer should have moved his application under section 14 also before the Delhi High Court. In this connection reliance was placed on the judgment of this court in the case of Union of India v. Surjeet Singh Atwal1. Aggrieved by decision of the trial court dated 24.9.1996, the Developer moved the Delhi High Court by way of the CRA. In the CRA the Developer contended that under the agreement (exhibit P-1) vide clause 21 it was agreed between the parties that the Faridabad courts alone shall have the jurisdiction in case of any dispute between the parties and, therefore, the trial court had territorial jurisdiction to entertain and try application dated 12.4.1994 under section 14 of the Act. It was contended, in the alternative, that where two courts have concurrent jurisdiction, the parties by agreement can choose the jurisdiction of one of them and such a choice was not against the public policy. It was contended that an agreement whereby jurisdiction of the court stood specified was not contrary to section 28 of the Contract Act and to the public policy. It was further contended that where two courts had territorial jurisdiction to try a case, it is open to the parties to enter into an agreement whereby jurisdiction of the court stood specified. On behalf of the Developer it was further contended that, at the time of execution of the agreement (exhibit P-1) the appellant herein resided at Faridabad and his subsequent change of address cannot change clause 21 of the agreement. It was further urged on behalf of the Developer that an application under section 20 of the Act was filed by the appellant herein in the Delhi High Court and it had no relevance with clause 21 of exhibit P-1. According to the Developer, filing of such suit under section 20 of the Act before the Delhi High Court cannot alter the terms of exhibit P-1. It was further urged on behalf of the Developer that it had instituted the above suit for permanent injunction in the Delhi High Court. That suit was Suit No. 945/92 for permanent injunction which was for a relief which had no correlation with the arbitration matter. Moreover, that suit was for permanent injunction. Such a suit could have been filed in Delhi courts alone as in that suit it was alleged that the appellant herein was attempting to interfere with the Developer's possession. Such a suit did not constitute a waiver. On behalf of the Developer, it was further urged that the trial court had erred in coming to the conclusion that exhibit P-1 cannot be given effect as the suit property was located at Saket, New Delhi and that the parties were residing at Delhi.

9. On behalf of the appellant herein, it was sought to be argued before the High Court that although exhibit P-1 was executed at Faridabad and although at the relevant time the appellant resided in Faridabad, the dispute was in connection with recovery of possession and, therefore, the civil court at Faridabad had no jurisdiction to entertain, try and dispose of the Developer's application under section 14 of the Act. It was also urged that subsequently the appellant had shifted his residence from Faridabad to Saket in New Delhi and, therefore, the trial court was right in refusing to entertain the Developer's application dated 12.4.1994 under section 14 of the Act. Accordingly, on behalf of the appellant herein it was urged that no interference is called for in the CRA.

10. By the impugned judgment, the High Court held that Delhi High Court was not a competent court as the parties had chosen to confer exclusive jurisdiction upon the Faridabad court. In the circumstances, section 31(4) of the Act was not applicable. The High Court further held that there was no waiver on the part of the Developer by invocation of the jurisdiction of the Delhi court when the respondent instituted Suit No. 945/92 for permanent injunction. The High Court held that Suit No. 945/92 had no correlation with the arbitration matter. The High Court further held, that on the facts and circumstances of the present case, section 20 CPC was applicable; that section 20 CPC refers to institution of suits other than those covered by section 16 CPC on the basis of residence of defendant or cause of action. In the circumstances, the High Court allowed the Revision Petition holding, that the trial court at Faridabad had jurisdiction to entertain and try application dated 12.4.1994 under section 14 of the Act; that section 31(4) of the Act was not attracted; that the arbitrator had entered upon reference on the application of appellant herein and, therefore, there was no occasion for the appellant moving the Delhi High Court under section 20 CPC seeking reference. Hence this civil appeal.

11. As stated above, the short point which arises for determination in this civil appeal is whether application dated 12.4.1994 filed by the Developer in the trial court at Faridabad was maintainable.

12. At this stage, it may be mentioned that the trial court at Faridabad following the impugned judgment of the High Court had dismissed the objections of the appellant herein and it has made said Award dated
29.3.1994 the rule of the court. This was on 31.5.2006. On 23.1.2007 the Developer's Suit No. 945/92 for permanent injunction stood dismissed in default.

13. The basic point which needs to be decided by us is whether clause 21 of Agreement dated 16.3.1990 (Ex. P-1) conferring jurisdiction on the Faridabad court was ineffective and whether the appellant is right in his contention that the application made by the Developer under section 14 of the Act was not maintainable in the Faridabad court on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction.

14. Mr. Sunil Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that the Award made by the arbitrator dated 29.3.1994 being an ex parte Award was non est as it was passed after expiry of four months from the date when the arbitrator entered upon the reference. He contended that on 20.8.1992 the appellant had referred the dispute to the arbitrator. On 24.8.1992 the arbitrator entered upon the reference and fixed the date of hearing on 5.9.1992 on which date the appellant was present. On that date neither the arbitrator nor the Developer was present. On that date, the appellant herein sought the next date of hearing. Despite the telegram seeking the next date of hearing, the arbitrator did not respond. During the period October, 1992 and November, 1992 disputes arose when the MCD had issued notices directing the appellant herein to show cause why the building plan submitted by the Developer should not be revoked. Learned counsel pointed out that on 15.10.1992 the Developer had in fact instituted Suit No. 945/92 in the civil court at Delhi for permanent injunction. In that suit, vide para 16, the Developer had invoked jurisdiction of the Delhi court. In the circumstances, it was not open to the Developer to move the trial court at Faridabad on 12.4.1994 under section 14 of the Act. Learned counsel urged that both the parties were aware that the dispute was in respect of the suit property located at Saket in New Delhi. The dispute, according to the
learned counsel, was for possession of the suit property. The appellant herein had sought possession of the suit property even before the arbitrator. The Award of the arbitrator, according to the learned counsel, itself indicates that the arbitrator has given relief in favour of the Developer concerning immovable property and, therefore, the trial court was right in coming to the conclusion that the application made on 12.4.1994 under section 14 by the Developer was not maintainable on the ground of territorial jurisdiction in view of section 31(4) of the Act. The second contention advanced on behalf of the appellant before us was that the impugned Award dated 29.3.1994 was non est. According to the learned counsel, four months time available to the arbitrator under clause 3 of Schedule I read with section 3 of the Act expired on 24.12.1992. After that date the arbitrator became functus officio. In the circumstances, the appellant herein filed an application under section 20 of the Act on 14.10.1993 before the Delhi High Court for appointment of an arbitrator for adjudication of the dispute with the Developer. This application was converted into Suit No. 2482/93. It is only thereafter that the arbitrator suddenly purported to act as an arbitrator by fixing the date of hearing on 20.2.1994 when the appellant herein requested the arbitrator in the light of the above facts not to proceed with the arbitration proceedings since the entire matter was before Delhi High Court in Suit No. 2482/93. Despite the request made by the appellant, the arbitrator proceeded to make
an Award dated 29.3.1994 being an ex parte Award. Learned counsel further pointed out that in fact prior to his application under section 20, M.C.D. had revoked the sanction for construction of the complex and it was the appellant herein who had filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court being Writ Petition No. 5038/93 against the revocation by M.C.D.

15. On the first question on the lack of territorial jurisdiction, we do not find any merit in the contentions advanced on behalf of the appellant. We have examined Ex. P-1 between the appellant and the builder (Developer) dated 16.3.1990. The agreement describes the appellant as the owner. It describes M/s Chopra Land Development Pvt. Ltd. as the builder. Under the agreement, the appellant remains the owner. Under the agreement, the appellant applies to D.D.A. for time to construct a housing complex on a plot of land at Saket owned by the appellant. Under the agreement, the
Developer agrees to construct a housing complex on the plot bearing No. G-13, Saket, New Delhi. Under the agreement, the entire construction cost is financed by the Developer. Under the agreement, the housing complex consisted of basement, ground floor, mezzanine first floor, second floor and third floor. Under the agreement, the Developer agreed to construct the housing complex without prejudice to the owner's right. Under the agreement, the owner was required to give permission to the builder to construct the housing complex. Under the agreement, the entire cost of construction was to be borne by the Developer. Under the agreement, the building plan, the completion certificate etc. were to be signed by the appellant-owner. Under the agreement, vide clause 15, the Developer agreed to pay to the appellant-owner a sum of Rs. 5 lacs in consideration of his seeking permission to construct the housing complex. This was in addition to the construction cost to be incurred by the Developer. Clause 16 of the agreement stated that in consideration of the Developer's services to construct the housing complex, the appellant agrees to allow the ownership of the basement, ground floor and mezzanine along with proportionate interest in the land to be transferred in the name of the Developer. At this stage, it may be noted that under the ex parte Award dated 29.3.1994 the arbitrator has passed his Award in terms of para 16 and, therefore, it was contended before us on behalf of the appellant that the dispute related to possession of the property; that the dispute was comparable to a suit for land and that the submission was made specifically in view of the Award being passed in terms of para 16 of the agreement (Ex. P-1). It was urged that since the arbitrator has passed the Award directing the appellant to transfer the ownership of basement, ground floor, mezzanine along with the proportionate interest in the land in favour of the Developer, the present dispute related to recovery of possession and since the lands were located in Saket the trial court had no jurisdiction to make the Award rule of the court under section 14 of the Act. As stated above, we do not find merit in the contention advanced on behalf of the appellant. We have examined Ex. P-1 in entirety. Apart from the above clauses of exhibit P-1, we have already quoted clauses 11, 20, and 21 by which the parties agreed that in case of dispute between the parties the same shall be referred for arbitration to the sole arbitrator at Faridabad and his decision shall be binding on both the parties. Under clause 21, the parties agreed that the Faridabad court alone shall have the jurisdiction in case of any dispute between the parties. On our examining the terms and conditions of exhibit P-1 along with the surrounding circumstances thereto, we are of the view that exhibit P-1 was a pure Development Agreement. The agreement is merely an agreement whereby a party agrees to develop certain property for a certain consideration. Under the agreement, the appellant herein continues to remain the owner. He has to apply for permission to construct the building to the D.D.A.. The Developer agrees to construct on the land. The Developer agrees to finance the entire construction cost and in lieu of the Developer's services in the matter of construction of housing complex the owner (appellant herein) agrees to permit transfer of the ownership a part of the complex to the Developer. It is for this reason, as indicated by the events enumerated above, that M.C.D. had issued notice to the appellant on 21.9.1992 to show cause why the building plan submitted should not be revoked. It is for the above reasons, that M.C.D. ultimately revoked the sanction for the construction of the housing complex on 18.5.1993 and it is the appellant herein as owner who had sought to challenge the revocation vide Writ Petition No. 5038/93. On the facts of this case, therefore, it cannot be said that the trial court at Faridabad had no jurisdiction to make the Award the rule of the court under section 14 of the Act. Section 31(1) of the Act provides that an Award may be filed in any court having jurisdiction in the matter to which the reference relates. Under that section, the Award can be filed in the court within whose jurisdiction the property in dispute lies. Parties cannot give jurisdiction to a court under section 14 by consent if that court does not has jurisdiction. If an award refers to an immovable property, the court having jurisdiction in respect of the same will entertain an application under section 14. In order to decide as to which court has jurisdiction to entertain a petition under section 14, reference has to be made to section 2(c) read with section 31(1) of the Act. Merely because the arbitrator chooses to hold the proceedings in a place where no suit could be instituted, and chooses to make an award at that place, it would not give the court of that place territorial jurisdiction to decide the matter under the Act. Section 30 refers to ground for setting aside an award. Section 30 is to be read with section 33. The idea behind the entire scheme of the Arbitration Act appears to be that an application by a party challenging the validity of correctness of the award on whatever ground has to be made under section 33. Section 33 is the only section under which a party is given the right to apply to the court to challenge either the agreement or the award. Under the Act, therefore, after the Award has been filed a party is permitted to make an application under section 33 to bring all kinds of defects to the notice of the court and the court will give reliefs either under section 15 or section 16 or even under section 30 of the Act. In an arbitration without the intervention of the court, an award can be filed in any court having jurisdiction in the matter to which the reference relates. The award can be filed only in the court which would have jurisdiction in respect of the subject matter of the dispute. In order to decide the jurisdiction of the court, it is necessary to decide whether the court would have jurisdiction to try a regular suit between the parties in which the relief is claimed. Section 33 does not prescribe the court before which an application under this section may be filed, but section 31 makes such provision. Section 31(2) provides that all questions regarding the validity, effect or existence of an award or an arbitration agreement shall be decided by the court in which the award has been filed or may be filed. Section 2(c) lays down the forum. The application has to be moved in the court within whose jurisdiction the opposite party resides or carries on business or within whose jurisdiction any part of the cause of action arises. Residence or ness or within whose jurisdiction any part of the cause of action arises. Residence or carrying on business of a party, apart from the place of accrual of a cause of action is relevant for determining the territorial jurisdiction of the court in arbitration cases, if the question so arises in connection with the subject matter of the dispute.

16. Applying the above tests to the facts of the present case, we are of the view that at the relevant time the appellant resided at Faridabad. He resided at Faridabad when the contract was made. Under the contract, the parties agreed to refer all disputes to the Faridabad court. Apart from the residence, we are also concerned with the place of accrual of the cause of action. In the present case, a bare reading of the agreement indicates that it is an agreement to develop. The appellant remains the owner, the Developer remains the contractor. The Developer is the financer. The appellant is the owner of an asset. The contractor/ Developer agrees to exploit that asset on behalf of the owner. The Developer funds the scheme. The building plans remained in the name of the owner. The D.D.A. informs the owner regarding revocation of the building plan. The owner files the writ petition challenging the revocation. The contractor is paid consideration in terms of a part of the property. In the circumstances, it cannot be said that this case is similar to a suit for land. One cannot look at para 16 alone in isolation. On the other hand, with open eyes, the parties had entered into the contract, they had agreed to refer all disputes to an arbitrator at Faridabad and they had agreed that the Faridabad court alone shall have jurisdiction. In a matter of this kind, it cannot be said that the claim is similar to a suit for land. A housing complex has to be constructed at the site. When dispute arises, it will not be confined only to immovable property. Such disputes also require accounts to be maintained. The disputes also involve rendition of accounts. In the circumstances, in our view, Section 20 CPC alone is attracted. Therefore, in our view, the High Court was right in holding that the Faridabad court had jurisdiction to make the Award the rule of the court.

17. As stated above, one of the points raised on behalf of the appellant herein is that ex parte Award dated 29.3.1994 was non est since it was made beyond four months from the date when the arbitrator entered upon the reference. We do not find any merit in this contention. Chapter II of the Arbitration Act covers references, in which the parties may proceed, if nothing goes wrong, up to the stage of delivery of the award, without the intervention of the court. This does not mean that the court has no authority to intervene at an early stage, should it become necessary. In the present case, as stated above, the arbitrator entered upon a reference pursuant to the notice given by the appellant on 24.8.1992. The notice was given on 20.8.1992. Therefore, section 8 of the Act has no application. Section 8 applies only where the parties do not concur in the appointment. Section 8 and Section 20 operate in different provinces. Section 20 confers power on the court to order the agreement to be filed and to make an order of reference to the arbitrator appointed by the parties or where they do not agree, the court can appoint any other person of its choice as an arbitrator. This discussion is important. This difference between section 8 and section 20 shows that the reference flows from an agreement between the parties in the cases falling under section 8. The reference flows from the agreement in cases falling under Chapter II of the Arbitration Act and as long as the agreement stands, the reference remains valid unless it is superseded by an order of the court under section 19. Under that section, where award becomes void under Section 16(3) or where an award is set aside, the court may by an order supersede the reference and shall thereupon order that the arbitration agreement shall cease to have effect. Therefore, till such time as the order is passed by the court under section 19 superseding the reference, the same shall remain valid till the agreement is superseded. This is the scope of section 8 read with section 19 of the Act. On the other hand, in cases falling under section 20 of the Act, power is conferred on the court to
make an order of reference to the arbitrator. That power is conferred on the court which orders the agreement to be filed before it. In a proceeding under section 8, disputes are presented by the parties before the arbitrator. Whereas in proceedings under section 20, the disputes are referred by the court. It is for this reason that it has been repeatedly held that merely because an arbitrator does not make an award within the specified period of four months the court has the power to extend the period. The award given by an arbitrator after four months is not binding on the parties. Such an award is vitiated as the arbitrator has no power to make an award after four months. However, a bare failure of an arbitrator to make an award within the time allowed by law will not involve the consequences of it being set aside only on that ground. The court has ample powers in a given case to extend the time and give life to the vitiated award by exercising judicial discretion under section 28 of the Act. An application to have the award set aside on the ground that it was made beyond time prescribed has to be moved under the Act. No separate suit would lie for that purpose. Section 28 is not limited only to references to arbitration made in a suit pending before the court. Further, the power given to the court under section 28 is so wide that it can extend the time even if the award is made beyond four months from the date of the arbitrator entering upon the reference. The only restriction is that it must be exercised with judicial discretion. In the present case, as state above, the Developer moved an application for making the award the rule of the court on 12.4.1994. Unfortunately, the appellant chose not to appear before the trial court. In the circumstances, an ex parte decree came to be passed on 31.5.2006. We have used the word unfortunately because the appellant herein had filed his objections before the trial court. Those objections were dismissed as he chose to remain absent. The appellant chose to remain absent as he had moved or decided to move this Court in special leave petition against the impugned judgment of the High Court on the point of territorial jurisdiction. The judgment of the High Court is dated 19.4.2006. The Award is made the rule of the court by the trial court on 31.5.2006 in view of the impugned judgment of the High Court. We have also gone through the Award. We do not wish to express any opinion on the merits, however, the fact remains that the arbitrator entered upon the reference on 24.8.1992. He fixed 06 passed by the trial court at Faridabad making Award dated 29.3.1994 the rule of the court. Consequently, we direct restoration of the matter to the file of the Court of Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Faridabad in Case No. 7 instituted on 12.4.1994 titled M/s Chopra Land Developers Pvt. Ltd. v. Jatinder Nath and anr.. We may clarify that the trial court will proceed on the basis that it has territorial jurisdiction to decide the application made by the Developer under sections 14 to 17 of the Act. The said application will be decided on merits alone in accordance with law. In other words, the trial court will re-examine the question on merits as to whether the Award given by the arbitrator on 29.3.1994 should or should not be made the rule of the court. The trial court will have to decide whether to extend the period for making the Award or not, whether to supercede the reference or not. The trial court will proceed in accordance with law. Any observation on the merits of the case mentioned hereinabove shall not be treated as opinion of this Court. Further, the trial court will proceed on the basis that it has territorial jurisdiction to decide the above matter.

18. Subject to above, the civil appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs.

**********
HEADNOTE
CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960
Sections 91, 163, 94, 18 - Bar of jurisdiction - Suits for declaration - Land owned by Society - In a General Board Meeting, Society resolved to sell the land owned by it - Application for division of society already pending - Sale deed/conveyance executed on 07.12.2009 - Suits filed in 2010 challenging the resolution 6.12.2009 - If suits are barred by Sections 91 and 163 of the Act - If the provisions exclude the jurisdiction of Civil Court. Held that a dispute arising out of decision to alienate property is not covered by Section 163. Suits are also not barred by Section 91 as disputes covered there-under are among specified persons and not third party. Marine Times Publications (P) Ltd.'s [JT 1990 (4) SC 332] case relied and followed.
HELD
A dispute arising out of a decision of the society to alienate the property of the society, in our opinion, is not expressly covered under Section 163 of the Act. (Para 19)

Section 91 also stipulates that the disputes which are mandatorily required to referred to the Co-operative Court for an adjudication must also be disputes arising between the parties to the dispute who should belong to one or the other categories specified under clauses (a) to (e) to sub-section (1), hereinafter referred to as 'enumerated persons', for the sake of convenience. It can be seen from the scheme of Section 91, to confer exclusive jurisdiction on the Co-operative Court, the dispute must satisfy two requirements. (Para 22)

Section 91(1)(c) stipulates that persons other than the members of the society with whom the society has any transaction as one of the classes of persons who could be parties to a dispute amenable exclusively to the jurisdiction of the Co-operative Court. The said sub-section further qualifies the said class by expressly mentioning that the transactions of such persons with a society should be a transactions "in respect of which restrictions and Regulations have been made or prescribed under Sections 43, 44, or 45 of the Act". (Para 24)

Where Section 91 (1) (c) speaks of persons other than the members of the society, it is actually referring to persons other than the members of the society who have deposited money with the society or who have either lent or borrowed money from the society in accordance with the provisions of Sections 43 and 44 and subject to the conditions and limitations if any prescribed with reference to such lending to or borrowing from the society. (Para 29)

Section 94(3)(a) does not enable a person other than an enumerated person to refer a dispute to the Co-operative Court. The said legal position is made clear in Marine Times (supra). (Para 32)

The property in which the 3rd party acquired interest must bear some relationship with the dispute pending before the tribunal. (Para 34)

Having regard to the language of Section 94, sub-section (3)(a), more specifically "has acquired any interest", the acquisition of the interest contemplated is only an acquisition made during the pendency of the dispute before the Co-operative Court. (Para 36)

Even if the Co-operative Court came to the conclusion that the resolution is illegal, it would always be open for the respondents 22 and 23 to ignore such a determination as they are not parties to the proceedings and assert their title on the basis of the conveyance dated 7th December, 2009. If any party such as the plaintiffs (the appellants herein) disputes the validity of the title conveyed thereunder, necessarily such a dispute would have to be adjudicated by a competent Court under Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure wherein, necessarily, the question whether a valid title was conveyed in favour of respondents 22 and 23 by the society would arise for determination. The legality of the resolution would still have to be gone into again. (Para 38.1.)

For all the above-mentioned reasons, the conclusion of the High Court that the suits in question are not maintainable on the ground that the dispute is amenable to the exclusive jurisdiction under Section 91 of the Act to the Co-operative Court cannot be sustained. (Para 39)

Sections 91, 163 - Civil Procedure Code, 1908, Section 9A [As amended by Maharashtra] - Bar of jurisdiction - Question of maintainability of civil suits - Hearing of interim application - If Court can go into question of maintainability of suits. Held that as per provision, issue has to be decided as a preliminary issue. (Para 40)


CHELAMESWAR, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. These appeals arise out of a common order dated 29th August, 2011 of the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court passed in three writ petitions and two suits, 144 and 145 of 2010.

3. By the said common order, it was held, among other things, that the two suits are not maintainable in view of the provisions of Sections 91 and 163 of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 (hereinafter 'the Act', for short). We are not concerned with the remaining part of the Division Bench's judgment as the instant special leave petitions are preferred only against that part of the Division Bench's judgment. The brief factual background of this litigation is as follows.

4. The first respondent is a Society which was originally incorporated in the year 1914. The full particulars of such incorporation are not available at this juncture on record and are also not necessary for the present purpose. It is sufficient to state that it is admitted on all hands that it is a housing cooperative society and the Act governs the affairs of the said Society.

5. It is also an admitted fact on all hands that the said Society has different classes of members known as owners, lessees, allottees, tenants, etc. It is also an admitted fact that the total membership is 762 out of which 69 members fall under the classification of tenant members. However, the exact rights and obligations of these various classes of members, vis-ï¿½-vis the first respondent Society or these various classes of members inter se are also not available on record.

6. It appears from the record that, as on today, the first respondent Society owns an extent of approximately 21,774.10 sq. mts. of land in the city of Mumbai alongwith structures popularly known as Wellingdon Catholic Colony. It appears that the said property was part of a larger parcel of land earlier owned by the first respondent Society but is not owned by the Society now. Some of the 'tenant members' (including the appellants herein) of the Society initiated proceedings for the division of the Society sometime in the year 1970 invoking Section 18 of the Act by making an application to the Registrar. The said application has a very long and chequered history, the details of which are not necessary for the present purpose except to state that by virtue of the judgment under appeal, the application is still open and pending.

7. In the meanwhile, in a resolution came to be passed on the 6th December, 2009 by the General Body of the Society to sell the above mentioned land in favour of respondents No.22 and 23. In furtherance of the said resolution, a sale deed/conveyance came to be executed on 7th December, 2009. Aggrieved by the said resolution and the sale, two suits 144 and 145/2010 came to be filed invoking the original jurisdiction of the Bombay High Court. A copy of the plaint in the suit No.145/2010 is placed on record in these SLPs. The principal prayer in both the civil suits is

"(a) for a declaration that the said Resolution dated 6th December, 2009 (Exhibit 'K' hereto) and the said Conveyance dated 7th December, 2009 (Exhibit 'M' hereto) are invalid, illegal and void ab initio and/or the same are voidable as against the Plaintiffs and the Tenant members of Defendant No.17 Association;

(a-i) That this Hon'ble Court be pleased to pass Order declaring Section 164 of Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 12 Violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and the same ought to be struck down."

7.1. It can be seen from prayer (a) extracted above that the plaintiffs seek in effect two declarations - (i) that a resolution dated 6th November, 2009 of the first respondent Society, and (ii) a Conveyance dated 7th December, 2009 executed on behalf of the first respondent Society in favour of respondents 22 and 23, are either illegal, void ab initio or in the alternative that they are voidable as against the plaintiffs (of whom at least some) are the appellants herein and claim to be the tenant members of the respondent society (we may state here that there is a dispute regarding the membership of some of the appellants herein but, for the present case, we do not go into the dispute but refer the appellants, only for the sake of convenience, as 'tenant members'). The substance of the factual and legal basis (asserted in the plaint) on which the plaintiffs seek the two declarations (referred to earlier) in the civil suits, and argued at the Bar is that the 'tenant members' alone have the right, title and interest over the property sought to be sold by the impugned conveyance dated 7th December, 2009 and that the other members of the Society have no right, title or interest in the property in dispute. The plaintiffs expect an order of bifurcation of the respondent No.1 Society and also to get a declaration in their favour of the right, title and interest in the property in dispute. The plaintiffs also therefore claimed appropriate interim orders regarding the property during the pendency of the suits.

8. The defendants raised a preliminary objection regarding the maintainability of the suits in view of Sections 91 and 163 of the Act which was rejected by a learned single judge but found favour with the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court resulting in that part of the judgment which is under appeal now.

9. By the judgment under appeal it is held that:

"In our opinion, therefore, what is principally challenged in the Civil Suit is the resolution of the general body. And challenge to the conveyance is ancillary"

9.1. And therefore opined:

"That the Plaintiffs could have filed the dispute before the Co-operative Court challenging the resolution of the General Body and the consequent execution of conveyance in favour of M/s. Sumer associates and could have joined M/s. Sumer associates as a Defendant in that dispute. In our opinion thus the entire subject matter of the Civil Suit could have been the subject matter of the dispute filed under Section 91."

10. Shri Mukul Rohtagi and Dr. Abhishek M. Singhvi, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants argued that irrespective of the fact whether a declaration regarding illegality of the impugned resolution dated 6th December, 2009 could be granted by the ordinary civil courts in view of Section 91 of the Act, a declaration regarding the voidness of the impugned conveyance dated 7th December, 2009 could only be given by a competent civil court contemplated under Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter 'the Code' for short) because such conveyance is in favour of a person who is not a member of the Society. It is submitted that the ultimate dispute and grievance of the plaintiffs is against the alienation of the property in favour of the respondents 22 and 23 herein by the impugned conveyance which has the effect of depriving the plaintiffs of their right, title and interest in the property in dispute. Such a conveyance could only be declared illegal and void ab initio by a competent civil court contemplated under Section 9 of the Code. The impugned resolution, which purportedly authorises the sale of the property covered by the impugned conveyance, by itself does not transfer or create any interest in the property adverse to the interest of the plaintiffs. Therefore, even if it is assumed that the legality of the impugned resolution is amenable to the jurisdiction of the Co-operative Court functioning under Section 91, the suits in question could not have been held to be not maintainable as the jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the incidental question regarding the impugned resolution dated 6th December, 2009 would stand subsumed by the jurisdiction of the competent civil court which alone is competent to decide the legality of the impugned conveyance dated 7th December, 2009. The learned counsel further argued that the ouster of the jurisdiction conferred on the Civil Courts under Section 9 of the Code is to be conceded only where there is an express exclusion by the language of the Statute or if such an ouster arises by a necessary implication from the Scheme of a particular Statute. It is argued that there is nothing either in the language of Section 91 or the Scheme of the Act which would lead to a conclusion that the jurisdiction conferred under Section 9 of the Code is excluded to adjudicate the suits in question.

11. On the question of interim order during the pendency of the suits, the learned counsel argued that in view of the pendency of the claim of the plaintiff for the bifurcation of the respondent society (and according to the appellants, they have a very strong case), the disputed property must be preserved as it is and the balance of convenience is in favour of the appellants. The learned counsel argued that the High Court grossly erred in examining the maintainability of the suits in the interlocutory application filed by the plaintiff seeking interim order.

12. On the other hand, learned senior counsel Shri C.A. Sundaram appearing for the respondents argued that the language of Section 91, sub-section 1(c) of the Act clearly indicates that the jurisdiction of the Co-operative Court contemplated under Section 91 is not confined only to the adjudication of the disputes between the society and its members or servants etc. enumerated in Section 91(1)(a), (b), (d) and (e) but also extends to the disputes where one of the parties to the dispute is a person other than a member of the society.

13. According to the learned counsel, such conclusion is irresistible from the language of Section 91(1) (c) and Section 94 (3) (a). Hence, the judgment under appeal does not call for any interference.

14. Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned senior counsel submitted that the course adopted by the Bombay High Court in examining the maintainability of the suits in the Interlocutory Application filed by the plaintiffs is not only justified but also mandatory in view of the language of Section 9A of the Civil Procedure Code inserted by the State Legislation of Maharashtra.

15. On the question of interim arrangement to be made during the pendency of the suit, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the suit itself is based on the expectancy that the tenant Members would succeed in their application for the bifurcation of the society, and upon bifurcation, the tenant members would be entitled for the exclusive title and possession of the disputed property. Even if the above mentioned understanding of the plaintiff's is right since the plaintiffs are only some of the tenant members of the society, they would not be entitled for the title and possession of the entire disputed property, but only a part of it. It is argued that since other tenant members have no objection to the alienation of the property in dispute in favour of the respondent no. 22 and 23, impeding of conveyance dated 7th December, 2009 would not be justified as the impugned resolution and the conveyance have made adequate provisions for safeguarding the interest (if any) of the appellants.

16. We shall now examine the issue of maintainability of the suits. As rightly contended by the learned counsel for the appellants the Civil Court's jurisdiction to adjudicate Civil disputes is unlimited, subject only to the limitations imposed by law either expressly or by necessary implications. The law in this regard is well settled and needs no elaboration. Therefore, it becomes necessary for us to examine whether there is anything in the language of Section 91 or Section 163 which expressly excludes the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts in the context of the suits in question. Section 163 of the Act bars the jurisdiction of Civil and Revenue Courts reads as follows:

"163. Bar of jurisdiction of Courts.

(1) Save as expressly provided in this Act, no Civil or Revenue Court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of

(a) the registration of a society or its by-laws or the amendments of its by-laws or the dissolution of the committee of a society, or the management of the society on dissolution thereof: or

(b) any dispute required to be referred to the Co-operative Court for decision.

(c) any matter concerned with the winding up and dissolution of a society.

(2) while a society is being wound up, no suit or other legal proceeding relating to the business of such society shall be proceeded with or instituted against the society or any member thereof, or any matter touching the affairs of the society, except by the leave of the Registrar, and subject to such terms as he may impose.

(3) all orders, decisions or awards passed in accordance with the Act or the Rules shall, subject to the provisions for appeal or revision in this Act be final; and no such order, decision or award shall be liable to be challenged, set aside, modified, revised or declared void in any Court upon the merits or upon any other ground whatsoever."

17. Section 163 (1)(b) and Section 91 (3) are complimentary to each other. Section 91(3) reads as follows:

"Save as otherwise provided under "sub-section (2) to section 93, no Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or other proceedings in respect of any dispute referred to in sub-section (1)"

18. It can be seen that the Section 163 only excludes the jurisdiction of the Civil Court with reference to the disputes arising out of the registration:

1) Registration of the society;

2) Disputes relating to the bye-laws of the society;

3) Dissolution of the Committee of the society;

4) Management of the society on dissolution of the society;

5) Any disputes which is required to be referred to the Co-operative Court under Section 91.;

6) Any matter concerned with the winding up and dissolution of the society etc.

19. A dispute arising out of a decision of the society to alienate the property of the society, in our opinion, is not expressly covered under Section 163 of the Act. It is to be examined whether it is a matter which is required to be resolved by the Co-operative Court by virtue of the provisions under Section 91 of the Act. In view of the conclusion of the High Court that "the entire subject matter of the civil suit could have been the subject matter of dispute filed under Section 91."

20. It is necessary to examine the scope of Section 91(1), which reads as follows

"(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force any dispute touching the Constitution, (Election of Committee or its Officers) other than the elections of the committees of the specified societies including its officers), Conduct of general meetings, management or business or a society shall be referred by any of the parties to the disputes, or by federal society to which the society is affiliated or by a creditor of the society, ( in the Co-operative Court) If both the parties there to are one or other of the following;

(a) a society, its committee, any past committee, any past or present officer, any past or present agent, any past and present servant or nominee, heir or legal representative of any deceased officer, deceased agent or deceased servant of the society or the liquidator of the society (or the official Assignee of a De-Registered Society),

(b) a member, past member of a person claiming through a member, past member of a deceased member of society, or a society which is a member of the society ( or a persons who claims to be a member of the society;)

(c) a person other than a member of the society, with whom the society has any transactions in respect of which any restrictions or regulations have been imposed, made or prescribed under sections 43,44 or 45 and any person claiming through such person:

(d) a surety of a member, past member or deceased member, or surety of a person other than a member with whom the society has any transactions in respect of which restrictions have been prescribed under section 45, whether such surety or person is or is not a member of the society:

(e) any other society , or the Liquidator of such a society or de-registered society or the official Assignee of such a de-registered society."

21. It can be seen from the above extract that the Section makes it mandatory that certain disputes, the nature of which is specified in the said sub-section, be referred to the 'Co-operative Court'1 - as defined under Section 2(10-a ii). Such reference is required to be made by "any of the parties to the dispute". The Section also specifies the nature/subject matter of dispute which is required to be referred to the Co-operative Courts. They are "disputes touching" the

1) Constitution of the society

2) Elections of the "Committee or its officers"

3) Conduct General Meetings

4) Management of the society or

5) Business of the society.

22. Section 91 also stipulates that the disputes which are mandatorily required to referred to the Co-operative Court for an adjudication must also be disputes arising between the parties to the dispute who should belong to one or the other categories specified under clauses (a) to (e) to sub-section (1), hereinafter referred to as 'enumerated persons', for the sake of convenience. It can be seen from the scheme of Section 91, to confer exclusive jurisdiction on the Co-operative Court, the dispute must satisfy two requirements. It was held so in Marine Times Publications (P) Ltd. v. Shriram Transport & Finance Co. Ltd. [JT 1990 (4) SC 332 : 1991 (1) SCC 469] at para 11:

"11. Before a dispute can be referred to a Cooperative Court under the provisions of Section 91(1) of the said Act it is not only essential that the dispute should be of a kind 1 'Co-operative Court' means a court constituted under this Act to decide disputes referred to it under any of the provisions of the Act. described in sub-section (1) of Section 91 but it is also essential that the parties to the said dispute must belong to any of the categories specified in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1) of the said section."

22.1. Both the subject matter as well as the parties to the dispute must be those specified under the section. In other words if either of the above mentioned two requirements is not satisfied then the dispute cannot be adjudicated by the Co-operative Court. If one of the parties to the dispute is not an enumerated person, the question whether the subject matter of the dispute is one which falls exclusively within the jurisdiction of the Co-operative Court need not be examined. Similarly, if it is found in a given case that the subject matter of dispute is not covered by Section 91, an enquiry into the question whether the parties to the dispute fall under any of the categories enumerated under Section 91 would become irrelevant.

23. However, learned counsel for the respondent argued that in view of the language of Section 91(1) (c) and Section 94(3) the various classes of persons contemplated under Section 91 to bring the dispute within the jurisdiction of the Co-operative Court (if the subject matter of the dispute is otherwise exclusively amenable to the jurisdiction of the Co-operative Court), includes persons other than the members of the society though not covered by clauses (a), (b), (d) and (e) of Section 91(1). The leaned counsel laid emphasis on the clause "persons other than a member of the society" occurring under Section 91(1) (c) and the clause "whether he be a member of the society or not has acquired any interest in the property of a person who is a party to a dispute" occurring under Section 94(3)(a) clearly demonstrate that the jurisdiction of the Co-operative Court is not confined only to those cases where both the parties are either members or officers etc. specified in clauses (a), (b), (d) and (e) of Section 91(1).

24. To examine the correctness of the submissions made by Shri C.A. Sundaram, it requires an analysis of Section 91(1)(c) and 94 (3). When Section 91(1)(c) stipulates that persons other than the members of the society with whom the society has any transaction as one of the classes of persons who could be parties to a dispute amenable exclusively to the jurisdiction of the Co-operative Court, such a class is not an unqualified class. The said sub-section further qualifies the said class by expressly mentioning that the transactions of such persons with a society should be a transactions "in respect of which restrictions and Regulations have been made or prescribed under Sections 43, 44, or 45 of the Act". Therefore, to understand the exact nature of the above mentioned class, an examination of the scheme of Sections 43, 44 is necessary.

25. Section 43 (1) reads as follows:

"43. (1) A society shall receive deposits and loans from members and other persons, only to such extent, and under such conditions, as may be prescribed, or specified by the by-laws of the society."

25.1. The said provision recognises the legal authority of a co-operative society to receive deposits and loans either from the members or other persons. It further stipulates that the receipt of deposits and loans is permissible only to the extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.

26. Section 44 on the other hand deals with the legal authority of the co-operative society to make a loan/lend money. Section 44 in so far as it is relevant reads as follows.

"44.(1) No society shall make a loan to any person other than a member or on the security of its own shares, or on the security of any person who is not a member.

Provided that with the special sanction of the Registrar, a society may make loans to another society.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-section, a society may make a loan to a depositor on the security of his deposit.

**********
CROSS CITATION
1987 AIR (SC) 2205
1987 (4) SCC 410
1988 (1) SCR 93
HEADNOTE
PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887
Section 77(3) - Res judicata - Test to be applied - Question of jural relationship - Jurisdiction of Revenue Courts and suits cognizable by them - Whether Revenue Court could go into the question whether respondent was a tenant in possession or mortgagee - Held no - If so, the subsequent civil suit (for title) was not barred by res judicata.

CASES REFERRED
1. Raj Lakshmi Dasi and others v. Banamali Sen and others [1953 IV S.C.R. 154]

2. Magiti Sasamal v. Pandab Bissoi [1962 3 S.C.R. 673]

3.Shri Raja Durga Singh of Solan v. Tholu [1963 2 S.C.R. 693]

4. Om Prakash Gupta v. Rattan Singh and another [1964 1 S.C.R. 259]

5.Lal Chand (dead) by Lrs. and others, v. Radha Kishan [1977 2 S.C.R. 522]

6. State of Tamil Nadu v. Ramalinga Samigal Madan [A.I.R. 1986 S.C. 794]


SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, J.

1. How far an order directing eviction of a person by the Revenue Court under section 77(3) of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 (hereinafter called 'the Act') operates as res judicata for a title suit filed by a person claiming to be a mortgagee and not a tenant of the alleged landlord, is the question that arises in this appeal by special leave from the Full Bench decision of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana dated 12th March, 1981 in second appeal. By the impugned order and judgment the High Court has dismissed the appeal of the appellants and affirmed the judgment and order dated 7th September, 1978 of the Additional District Judge, Gurgaon reversing the judgment and order of Sub Judge 1S Class, i dated 4th of November, 1977 dismissing the suit of the respondent.

2. It appears that the appellants filed proceedings in the Court of Assistant Collector 1st Grade Ballabgarh seek ejectment of the respondent from his lands on 29th July, 1975 under Section 77(3) proviso 2(e) of the Act on the ground that the respondent-tenant had defaulted in the payment of rent. The suit was decreed on 29th October, 1976. In execution of the decree the respondent was ejected from the suit land. No appeal though provided under the said Act was filed by the respondent from the said decree. The respondent however, filed a suit in the civil court against the appellants alleging that he in fact was mortgagee in possession of the suit land and not a tenant and that the decree of ejectment dated 29th of October, 1976 by the Revenue Court was without jurisdiction and, therefore, a nullity. The respondent claimed to be restored the possession of the suit land from which he had been wrongly outsted by the Revenue Court. The suit was dismissed by the learned Subordinate Judge on 4th November, 1977 holding that the claim of the respondent to be a mortgagee in possession of the suit land was wrong and that the order of the Revenue court was perfectly in order and was within that court's jurisdictional competence. It was alleged that it was of binding nature on the respondent and was not capable to challenge the same in subsequent proceedings. The claim, it was asserted, by the respondent in the subsequent suit, was barred by the principles of res judicata. The respondent lost. He filed an appeal against the said order of the learned Subordinate Judge. The learned Additional District Judge, Gargaon vide his order dated 7th September, 1978 reversed the findings of the trial court and decreed the suit of the respondent. Against the said order of the learned Additional District Judge the appellants filed Regular second Appeals which were placed for disposal before one of the learned Judges of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. After hearing counsel for the parties the learned Judge was of the view that there were conflicting judgments on the points for determination in the case which were of importance and the matter was referred to the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of the said High Court for the constitution of a larger bench for the determination of the points in controversy. The question referred to a large bench was whether, the decision of Rent Controller under the Rent Control Laws or a Revenue Court under section 77 of the Punjab Tenancy Act upon the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties operates as res judicata and is not open to challenge in a subsequent suit or in other collateral proceedings between the parties. The learned Chief Justice constituted a Full Bench of three learned Judges for resolving the conflict pointed out in the referring order. The three learned Judges of the Full Bench have given three separate judgment and ultimately the case came to be decided in accordance with the majority view.

3. The order of the Full Bench was that in accordance with the majority view it was held that the decision of the Revenue Court under Section 77 of the Punjab Tenancy Act upon the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties would not operate as res judicata and it would be open to challenge in a subsequent suit or any other collateral proceedings between the parties. The Full Bench thereafter directed the matter to go back to the learned single Judge for disposal in accordance with the decision of the Full Bench. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order and decision the appellants have come up in appeal before this Court.

4. It may be mentioned that of the three learned Judges, Sandhawalia, CJ. was of the view that it was to operate as res judicata, but the other two learned judges, namely, J.V. Gupta, J. and S.P. Goyal, J. held contrary views. It is the propriety and the validity of the majority view of the Full Bench which calls for an examination in this appeal.

5. In order to appreciate the controversy in appeal it is necessary to refer to the relevant provisions of the said Act. The preamble of the Act states that it was an Act to amend the law relating to the tenancy of land in Punjab. These provinces of Punjab had the distinction between the occupancy tenants and tenants-at-will with the rest of its early revenue Code from the United Provinces. the possession of the right to fixity of tenure by many cultivators in northern India was early recognised. Indeed the fact that in Lower Bengal the connection of persons whom was recognised as proprietors with the land was often far more recent than that of the cultivators inevitably suggested that the latter had rights in the soil that required protection. Fixity of tenure of resident cultivators at rents determined by authority was prominent feature of the Bengal Settlement as originally planned. Regulation XXVIII of 1803 professed to extend the Bengal system to the North Western Provinces, but it left the subject of tenant right in a vague and uncertain condition. The provisions of Regulation VII of 1922 were more definite. By its 9th section Settlement Officers were required not only to prepare a record of "persons enjoyed the possession and property of the soil, or vested with any hereitable or transferable interest" in it, that is to say, of proprietors, but also of "the rates per bigha .... demandable from the resident cultivators not claiming any transfenrnable property in the soil whether possessing the right of hereditary occupancy or not". It is not necessary to trace the history of this settlement laws which can be found in Douie's Settlement Manual, 4th Edition. Twelve years' uninterrupted possession of a holding at the same rate of rent was considered as a sufficient proof of occupancy right in the United Provinces. The twelve years' rule was very generally adopted in early Punjab settlements, though the best revenue officers held that it should not be regarded as the sole criterion, and that the quality, as well as the length of occupation should be considered. The Act in question was passed to amend the law of tenancy in Punjab which was later the object of the Act to protect the tenants from the exactions of the landlords. The tenants as usual in other parts of the world were in many cases peculiarly liable to oppression or duress from their landlords and in order to protect them quite effectively from the possibility of any such oppression or duress the Act was passed.

6. The overall scheme of the Acts is to provide speedy remedies with regard to disputes between the landlords and tenants and also under what circumstances that relatioinship comes to an end. It is appropriate to bear in mind the whole basic question involved in this appeal is whether the courts created by this Act have limited power and jurisdiction or plenary powers and jurisdiction. In this appeal we are concerned with the amplitude of the jurisdiction of the courts under section 77 of the Act which deals with Courts and suits cognizable by them. Relavant portion of section 77 of the Act provides as follows:

"77. Revenue Courts and suits cognizable by them. - (i) When a Revenue-officer if exercising jurisdiction with respect to any such suit as is described in sub-section (3), or with respect to an appeal or other proceedings arising out of any such suit, he shall be called a Revenue Court.

(2) ...............................

(3) The following suits shall be instituted in, and heard and determined by, Revenue Courts, and no other Court shall take cognizaqnce of any dispute or matter with respect to which any such suit might be instituted:-

Provided that -

(1) ................

(2) ................

FIRST GROUP
..............................

SECOND GROUP
...............................

(e) suit by a landlord to eject a tenancy."

7. The controversy with which we are concerned in this appeal is a type of suits indicated in second group under clause (e), namely, suits by a landlord to eject a tenant.

8. The question of res judicata was analysed in the background of land acquisition proceedings by this Court in RAJ LAKSHMI DASI AND OTHERS V. BANAMALI SEN AND OTHERS (1953 IV S.C.R. 154). There this court observed that the right to receive compensation for property acquired in land acquisition proceedings as between rival claimants depended on the title to the property acquired and the dispute as to tiltle was raised by the parties and had to be decided by the land Acquisition judge after contest, so this decision as to tiltle operates as res judicata in a subsequent suit between the same parties on the question of title. The biniding force of a judgment delivered under the Land Acquisition Act depended on general principles of law and not on section 11 of the Civil procedure Code, and the decision of a Land Acquisition Judge would operate as res judicata even though he was not competent to try the subsequent suit. It has to be emphasised, however , that the right to compansation depended upon the title , but here in the instant case the right to ejectment existed only if the relationship of landlord and tenant existed. The Revenue Court did not have jurisdiction whether the claimant was the landlord to be entitled to eject the tenant.

9. Our attention was drawn by Sree Harbans Lal, learned counsel appearing for the appellants to section 98 of the Act, as to power of the Revenue Court to refer to the Civil Court a mdecision by the Revenue Court if it thought proper and also to section 99, where there is power to refer to High Court question as to jurisdiction. These provisions, in our opinion, do not in any way affect the question whether the decision of the Revenue Court under the Revenu Act can operate as res judicata in certain cases like the present. The limits of the jurisdiction would apparent by the fact that in all suits by landlord to eject a tenant, do not encompass suits to decide whether a a person is a tenant or not or whether the plaintiff is a landlord or not. The question was answered by this Court in OM PRAKASH GUPTA VS. RATTAN SINGH AND ANOTHER (1964 1 S.C.R.259) where Sinha, C.J. dealing with the Delhi Rent Control Act observed at pages 264 and 265 as follows:

"The most important question that arises for determination in this case is whether or not the Rent cantrol authporities had jurisdiction in the matter in contraversy in this Case. Ordinarily it is for the Civil Courts to determine whether and , if so, what jural relationship exists between the litigating parties. But Act has been enacted to privide for the control of rents and evictions of tenants, avowedly for their benefit and protection . The Act postulates the relationship of landlord and tenant which must be a preexisting relationship . The Act is directed to control some of the terms and incidents of that relationship. Hence, there is no express provision in the Act empoering the controller, or the Tribunal , to determine whether or not there is a relationship, of landlord and tenant. In most cases such a questionwould not arise for determination by the authorities under the Act. A landlord must be very ill- advised to start proceedings under the Act, if there is no such relationship of land lord and tenant. If a person in possession of the premises is not a tenant, the premises is not a tenant , the owner of the premises would be entitled to institute a suit for ejectment in the Civil Court, untrammelled by the provision of the Act. It is only when he happens to be the tenant of premises in an urban area that the provisions of the Act are attracted." (Emphasis Supplied).

10. In SHRI RAJA DURGA SINGH OF SOLAN VS. THOLU (1963 2 S.C.R. 693), this Court had occasion to consider the question of res judicata in the back ground of the jurisdiction of the court. That was a case under section 77 of the Puynjab Tenancy Act. In that case the appellant had filed a suit before the Civil Court for the ejectment of the resapondent therein on the ground that they were licenses. The respondents claimedthat they were occupancy tenants and contended that under section 77 of the Pnajab Tenancy Act, 1887, the suit was triable by a revenue court only and not by the civil court. The trial court and the first appellate court decreed the suit holding that the respondents were not tenants.On second appeal the Judicial Commissioner held that the respondents were occupancy tenants and that the civil court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit. It was held by this Court that the civil court had jurisdiction to entertain the suit and section 77 of the Panjab Tenancy Act was applicable "only to suits between landlord and tenants where there was no dispute that where there was no dispute that the person clutivating the land was a tenant".But where the status of the defendent as a tenant was not admitted by the landlord, section 77 did not bar a suit in a civil court. This Court held that it would , therefore be reasonable to infer that the legislature barred only those suits which form the cognizance of a civil court where there was not dispute between the parties that a person cultivating land or who was in possession of land was a tenant]. This is precisely what has been held in the two decisions of the Lahaore High Court where there was reference at pages 698-699 of the report. In the first of these two cases, Tek Chand, J. had observed:

"It is obvious that the bar under clause (4) is applicable to those cases only in which the relationship of landlord and tenant is admitted and the object of the tenancy i.e. whether the status of the tenant falls under sections 5,6,7 or 8 or the Act.

In that cases the suit was instituted by someone claiming to succeed to the tenancy of certain land on the death of the occupancy tenant. The learned Judge observed:

'In a suit like the one before us the point for decision is not the nature of the tenancy, but whether the defendent is related to the deceased tenant and if so whether their common ancestor had occupied the land. If these facts are established, the claimant, ipso factosucceeds to the occupancy tenancy. But if they are found against him, he is not a tenant at all.'

As this facts were not established the High Court held that the landlord was entitled to sue the defendent who had entered on the land asserting a claim to be a collateral of the deceased tenant but who failed to substantiate his claim. This view was affirmed by a full bench consisting of five Judges in the other Lahore case. In DAYA RAM VS.JAGIR SINGH (A.I.R. 1956 H.P.61) the same judicial Commissioner who decided the appeal before us has expressed the view that where in a suit for ejectment the existence of the relationship of landlord and tenant is not admitted by the parties the Civil Court had jurisdiction to try the suit and that such a suit did not fall under section 77(3) of the Act . In MAGITI SASAMAL VS. PANDAB BISSOI (1962 3 S.C.R 673 this Court was considering the provisions of section 17(1) of the Orissa Tenant Protection Act, 1948 (3 of 1948). The provisions of that section run thus:

'Any dispute between the tenant and the landlord as regards, (a) tenant's possession of the land on the 1st day September, 1947 and his right to the benefits under this Act, or (b) misuse of the land by tenant, or (c) fasilure of the tenant to culttivate the land properly, or (d) failure of the tenant to deliver to the landlord the rent accrued due within two months from the date on which it becomes payable, or (e) the quantity of the produce payable to the landlord as rent, shall be decided by the Collector on the application of either of the parties.'

It was contended in that case on behalf of the respondents who claimed to be tenants that suit for permanent injunction was barred by the provisions of section 7(1). Dealing with this contention this Court as follows:

'In other words, S.7(1) postulates the relationship of tenant and landlord between the parties and proceeds to provide for the exclusive jurisdiction of the Collector to try the five categories of disputes that may arise between the landlord and the tenant . The disputes which are the subject-matter of section 7(1)must be inregard to the five categories. That is the plain and obvious construction of the words 'any dispute as regards'. On this construction it would be unreasonable to hold that a dispute about the status of the tenant also falls within the purview of the said section. The scheme of section 7(1)to the tenant and landlord as such and it contemplates disputes of the specified character arising between them. Therefore, in our opinion, even on a liberal construction of section 7(1) it would be difficult to uphold the argument that a dispute as regards the excistance of relationship of landlord and tenant falls to be determined by the Collector under section 7(1)."

11. As regads the said observations, in so far as the essential facts are concerned, precisely the same is the position in the instant appeal. here the respondent ins claiming to be a mortgagee in possession and not a tenant in possession . In MAGITI SASAMAL VS. PANDAB BISSOI (1962 3 S.C.R.673), the appellant haqd filed in the Civil Court a Suit fort permanent injunction restraining the respondents from enttering tjhe lands in suit on the allegation that the lands in suit on the allegation that the lands belonged to him and were in his cultivatory possession for many years and the respondents had no right or title and had never cultivated them. The respondents contended that they were tenants of propotions of the said lands and were in cultivating possession of the same as tenants. The question which arose for decision was whether having regard to the provisions of section 7(1) of the Orrissa Tenants Protection Act, 1948 , the Civil Court had jurisdiction to entertain the suit which involved a dispute as to the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties . It was held that even on a liberal construction of section 7(1) of the Act, it cannot be held that disputes as regards the excistance of the relationship of landlord and tenant fall to be determine by the Collector under the Section . Dispute which are entrusted to the Collector under section 7(1)are the simple disputes specified therein in the five categories and do not include a serious dispute as to the relationship between the parties as landlord and tenant.

12. It is well- settled that ouster of jurisdiction of civil courts should not be inferred easily. It must be clearly provided for and established.

13. This question was again viewed in the background of the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956 in LAL CHAND (DEAD) BY LRS.AND OTHERS VS. RADHA KISHAN (1977 2 S.C.R 522),Where this Court reiterated that section 11 was not exhaustive and the principle which motivates that section could be extended to caseswhich do not fall strictly within the letter of the law. This Court further reiterated that the principle of res judicata was conceived in the larger public interest which rewquired that all litigation must, sooner than later, come to an end. This Court in the STATE OF TAMILNADU VS. RAMALINGA SAMIGAL MADAN (A.I.R.1986 S.c.794) has analysed the position in paragraph 8 as follows:

"The principles bearing on the question as to when exclusion of the Civil Court's jurisdiction can be inferred have been indicated in several judicial pronouncemants but we need referto only two only two decisions. In SECRETARY OF STATE VS. MASK AND COMPANY (A.I.R.1940 P.C. 105 at p.110) the privy Council at page 236 of the Report has observed thus:

'It is settled law that the exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts is not to be readily inferred but that such exclusion must either be explicity expressed or clearly implied. It is also well settled that even if jurisdiction is so excluded, the Civl Courts have jurisdiction to examine into cases where the provisions of the Act have not been complied with or the statutory tribunal has not acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial procedure.'

In DHULABHAI VS. STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH (1968 3 S.C.R. 662) hidayatullah, C.J., speaking for the Court, on an analisis of the various decisions cited before the Court expressing diverse views, culled out as many as 7 propositions; out of them the first two which are material for our purpose are these:

'(1) Where the status gives a finality to the orders of the special tribunal the civil Court's jurisdiction must be held to be excluded, if there is adequate remedy to do what the civil Courts would normally do in a suit. Such provision, however, does not exclude those cases where the provisions of the particular Act have not been complied with or the statutory tribunal has not acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial procedure.

(2) Where there is an express bar of the jurisdiction of the Court, an examination of the scheme of the particular Act to find the adequacy or the sufficiency of the remedies provided may be relevant but is not decisive to sustain the jhurisdiction of the civil Court.

Where there is no express exclusion the examination of the remedies and the scheme of the particular Act to find out the intendment bacomes necessary and the result of the inquiry may be decisive. In the latter case it is necessary to see if the status creates a special right or as liability and provides for the determination of the right or liability and further lays down that all questions about the said right and liability shall be determined by the tribunals so constituted, and whether remedies normally associated with actions in civil Courts are prescribed by the said status or not'.

14. Applying the aforesaid principles, it appears to us that if the dispute was as to the nature of the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties, the Revenue Court under the Punjab Tenancy Act had no jurisdiction when there was admitted position, the relationship of landlord and tenant was accepted, the remedies and rights of the parties should be worked out under the scheme of the Act.

15. salutary and simple test to apply in determining whether the previous decision operates as res judicata or on principles analogous thereto is to find out whether the first court, here the Revenue Court could go into the question whether the respondent was a tenant in possession or mortgagee in possession. It is clear in view of language mentioned before that it could not. If that be so there was no res judicata. The subsequent civil suit was not barred by res judicata.

16. In that view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the High Court of Punjab and Haryana was right in holding that there was no res judicata so far as the second suit based on the assertion of the title of the respondent was concerned. The appeals must, therefore, fail and are accordingly dismissed with costs.

Appeal dismissed.

**********
CROSS CITATION
1991 AIR (SC) 972
1991 (1) (Suppl) SCC 565
1990 (3) (Suppl) SCR 566
HEADNOTE
TENANCY AND LAND LAWS
U.P. Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Act, 1950
Sections 229-B, 293, 339 and 341 - Bhumidari rights - Declaration of - Second appeal arising out of suit under section 229-B - Reference of dispute to arbitration - Decision of the High Court that Board of Revenue had ample jurisdiction under section 203 of the Land Revenue Act to refer the dispute to arbitration - U.P. Land Revenue Act, 1901, sections 203 - Arbitration Act, 1940.
HELD
...provisions contained in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act are procedural provisions which are normally applicable to a court required in to adjudicate disputes brought before it. There is nothing in these provisions which may require restricting their application to applications and proceedings under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act. Some of the matters covered by Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act have been dealt with in Chapter XII of the Zamindari Abolition Act but most of the matters referred to in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act are not dealt with in the Zamindari Abolition Act. It cannot be assumed that while enacting the Zamindari Abolition Act the legislature intended that the aforesaid procedural provisions contained in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act would be applicable only to applications and proceedings under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act, but would not be applicable to applications and proceedings under provisions other than Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act. Schedule II to the Zamindari Abolition Act contains a list of applications and proceedings falling in 43 heads which can be initiated under the various provisions of the said Act. Only 5 out of these 43 matters (Sl Nos.39 to 43) relate to applications or proceedings under Chapter X and rest of the items mentioned in Schedule II relate to applications or proceedings under provisions other than Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act. Could it be the intention of the legislature that in the matter of adjudication of applications and proceedings under provisions other than Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act which would be substantially larger in number than those under Chapter X of the said Act, the provisions contained in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act should not be available to the revenue courts? Considering this question in the light of the provisions with regard to arbitration of disputes contained in Sections 203 to 207 of the Land Revenue Act we find it difficult to attribute such an intention to the legislature. Arbitration is a recognized mode of settlement of disputes. It enables the parties to resolve their dispute by a tribunal selected by them. The considerations which justify reference to arbitration of disputes arising in applications and proceedings under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act are equally applicable to applications and proceedings under other provisions of the said Act. ... we are of the view that in the judgment under appeal, the High Court has rightly taken the view that the Board of Revenue had ample jurisdiction under Section 203 of the Land Revenue Act to refer to arbitration the dispute involved in the second appeal pending before it which arose out of a suit filed under Section 229-B of the Zamindari Abolition Act. We are unable to endorse the contrary view taken by another learned Judge of the High Court in Sahdeo and Another vs. Deputy Director of Consolidation Varanasi at Allahabad and Others (supra). [Paras 15 and 16]

CASES REFERRED
1. Sahdeo and Another vs. Deputy Director of Consolidation, Varanasi at Allahabad and Others [1980 Allahabad Law Journal 1110] Overruled.

Books, Treatises and Articles Referred
:

Singh, G.P. : Principles of Statutory Interpretation, 4th Edition, p.51.

S.C. AGRAWAL, J. 

1. This appeal by special leave raises the question whether it was competent for the Board of Revenue to refer for arbitration the dispute relating to declaration of Bhumidari rights in agricultural land in a second appeal arising out of a suit instituted under Section 229-B of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Zamindari Abolition Act').

2. Badlu, father of Hakim Ali (appellant No.1), instituted a suit under Section 229-B of the Zamindari Abolition Act against respondent No.2, Lekhi Ram, wherein he sought a declaration that he is Bhumidar in respect of certain lands situate within the urban area of Municipal Board, Baraut. During the pendency of the said suit before the trial court Badlu died and the appellants were brought on record as the plaintiffs. The said suit was dismissed by the Sub Divisional Officer, Baghpat. But on appeal it was decreed by the Additional Commissioner, Meerut. Respondent No.2 filed a second appeal before the Board of Revenue. During the pendency of the said appeal, on the joint request of the parties, the Board of Revenue referred the dispute to arbitration and appointed Shri Anup Singh, respondent No.5 as the arbitrator. The arbitrator gave his award against which objections were filed by the appellants. One of the objections raised by the appellants was that the reference to arbitration was bad in law inasmuch as the Board of Revenue had no jurisdiction to refer the dispute for arbitration and the award given by the arbitrator is void and without jurisdiction. The Board of Revenue, by order dated March 9, 1973, rejected the said objection of the appellants and held that the dispute had been validly referred to arbitration. The appellants filed a writ petition wherein they challenged the said decision of the Board of Revenue. The said writ petition was dismissed by the Allahabad High Court (H.N. Seth, J.) by judgment dated November 17, 1976. The High Court held that the expression "court" in Section 2(c) of the Arbitration Act, 1940 does not include a Revenue Court. But in view of Section 203 of the U.P. Land Revenue Act, 1901 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Land Revenue Act') the High Court held that the provisions of the Arbitration Act are applicable to cases coming up for hearing before the Board of Revenue and the Board of Revenue had ample jurisdiction to refer a dispute involved in second appeal under the Zamindari Abolition Act to arbitration. Since the High Court was of the view that there was no infirmity in the order of the Board of Revenue referring the dispute pending before it to arbitration, it did not consider it necessary to deal with the objection raised by respondent No.2 that since the dispute had been referred to arbitration by the Board of Revenue with the consent of the appellants, they should not be permitted to invoke the discretionary jurisdiction of the High under Article 226 of the Constitution and to challenge the jurisdiction of the Board of Revenue to refer the dispute to arbitration. Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid decision of the High Court the appellants have filed this appeal.

3. Before we deal with the submission of Shri Satish Chandra, the learned counsel for the appellants, in support of the appeal, we would set out the relevant provisions of the Land Revenue Act and the Zamindari Abolition Act.

4. Section 203 of the Land Revenue Act confers the power to refer disputes to arbitration and it provides as under :-

"203 Power to refer disputes to arbitration. -

The Board, a Commissioner, an Additional Commissioner, a Collector, Additional Collector, an Assistant Collector of the first class, a Record Officer or an Assistant Record Officer, a Settlement Officer, or an Assistant Settlement Officer, may, with the consent of the parties, by order refer any dispute before it, or him, to arbitration."

In Section 204, provision is made with regard to procedure in cases referred to arbitration and it is prescribed that in all cases of reference to arbitration under Section 203, the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 shall apply so far as they are not inconsistent with anything in the Land Revenue Act. Section 205 prescribes that any application to set aside an award shall be made within ten days after the day appointed for hearing the award. Section 206 lays down that if the officer making the reference does not see cause to remit the award or any of the matters referred to arbitration for reconsideration, and if no application has been made to set aside the award, or if he has refused such application, he shall decide in accordance with the award, or if the award has been submitted to him in the form of a special case, according to his own opinion in such case. Section 207 bars an appeal or a suit in a Civil Court against a decision given under Section 206. All these provisions are contained in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act.

5. By Section 293 of the Zamindari Abolition Act the provisions of Chapter IX and X of the Land Revenue Act have been made applicable to applications in proceedings under the Zamindari Abolition Act. The said provision which is contained in Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act provides as under :-

"293 Provisions of Act III of 1901 applied to applications and proceedings under this Chapter. The provisions of Chapter IX and X of the United Provinces Land Revenue Act, 1901, as amended by this Act shall, insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, apply to applications and proceedings made or taken under this Chapter."

6. Section 339, which makes provision for repeals, is as follows:-

"339. Repeals. - With effect from the date of vesting in respect of any area -

(a) the enactments mentioned in List I of Schedule III shall be and are hereby repealed in their application to such area;

(b) so much of any other enactments as is inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter VIII to X of this Act shall be deemed and is hereby repealed in its application to such area;

(c) the United Provinces Land Revenue Act, 1990 (U.P. Act III of 1901), shall in its application to such area be deemed to be and is hereby amended to the extent mentioned in column 3 of the List II of the Schedule aforesaid.

Provided that where under this Act any interpretation has to be made, action taken or thing done in accordance with the provisions of the United Provinces Tenancy Act, 1939 (U.P. Act XVII of 1939), the same may be made, taken or done as if it has not been repealed by this Act."

7. Section 341 makes provision for application of certain Acts to the proceedings under the Zamindari Abolition Act, and it reads as under :-

"341. Application of certain Acts to the proceeding of this Act. - Unless otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, the provisions of the Indian Court Fees Act, 1870 (VII of 1870), the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908), and the Limitation Act, 1963 (XXXVI of 1963), including Section 5 thereof shall apply to the proceedings under this Act."

8. Shri Satish Chandra has urged that Section 293 of the Zamindari Abolition Act expressly limits the applicability of the provisions of Chapters IX and X of the Land Revenue Act, as amended by the Zamindari Abolition Act to applications and proceedings made or taken under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act and that since Section 203 of the Land Revenue Act is a provision contained in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act, it is applicable only to applications and proceedings made or taken under Chapter X (Sections 241 to 294) of the Zamindari Abolition Act and that said provisions of Section 203 of the Land Revenue Act would not be applicable to a second appeal arising out of a suit filed under Section 229-B of the Zamindari Abolition Act which was not a proceeding taken under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act. In this context, Shri Satish Chandra has also referred to Section 341 of the Zamindari Abolition Act and has pointed out under the said Section certain enactments namely, the Indian Court Fees Act, the Code of Civil Procedure and the Limitation Act have been applied to the proceedings under the Zamindari Abolition Act, under provisions other than Chapter X of the said Act, but the provisions of the Land Revenue Act have not been made so applicable. In support of his aforesaid submissions Shri Satish Chandra has also placed reliance on a later decision of the Allahabad High Court (B.D. Agarwal, J.) in Sahdeo and Another v. Deputy Director of Consolidation, Varanasi at Allahabad and Others , 1980, Allahabad Law Journal 1110.

9. It is no doubt true that under Section 293 of the Zamindari Abolition Act, the provisions of Chapters IX and X of the Land Revenue Act have been made applicable only to applications and proceedings made or taken under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act and since Section 203 falls in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act, it would not be applicable to proceedings made or taken under provisions other than those contained in Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act. In our view, however, Section 293 cannot be read in isolation. It has to be read along with Section 339. In Clause (c) of Section 339 it is prescribed that with effect from the date of vesting in respect of any area, the Land Revenue Act shall, in its application to such area, be deemed to be and is hereby amended to the extent mentioned in column 3 of the List II of the Schedule III of the Said Act. As a result the provisions of the Land Revenue Act containing the amendments as mentioned in column 3 of List II of Schedule III, would be applicable to the area to which the Act has been made applicable with effect from the date of vesting. Under column 3 of List II of Schedule III certain modifications and amendments have been made in the various provisions of the Land Revenue Act, but no modification has been made in Section 203 of the said Act. This would mean that the provisions of the Land Revenue Act, including Section 203, are applicable to the area in which the Zamindari Abolition Act has been applied with effect from the date of vesting.

10. Shri Satish Chandra has, however, pointed out that in Section 293 the legislature has used the words "apply to applications and proceedings made or taken under this Chapter" and similarly in Section 341 the words "shall apply to the proceedings under this Act" have been used, whereas in Section 339 the words "in its application to such area" have been used. The submission of Shri Satish Chandra is that this difference in the language used by the legislature in Sections 293, 339, 341 indicates that in the matter of applicability of the provisions of the Land Revenue Act a distinction has to be drawn between applicability to proceedings and applications under the Zamindari Abolition Act and applicability to a particular area and that by virtue of Section 339(c) of the Zamindari Abolition Act the provisions of the Land Revenue Act cannot be said to have been made applicable to proceedings under the Zamindari Abolition Act and the provisions of the Land Revenue Act can be said to have been made applicable to the area to which the provisions of the Zamindari Abolition Act are applied with effect from date of vesting.

11. This distinction based on the difference in terminology used in Section 293 and 339(c) does not, in our view, advance the case of the appellants. It only indicates that Section 293 is limited in its scope in applying the provisions of Chapters IX and X of the Land Revenue Act to applications and proceedings under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act whereas Section 339(c) is much wider in amplitude in as much as it makes all the provisions of the Land Revenue Act applicable to the area to which the provisions of the Zamindari Abolition Act are applied. The Land Revenue Act contains provisions relating to appointments and jurisdiction of revenue officers, maintenance of maps and records and appointment of Kanungos and Lekhpals for that purpose, revision of maps and records, settlement of the revenue, revision of assessment, partition and union of Mahals, collection of revenue, Procedure of Revenue Courts and Revenue Officers, Appeals Reference and Revision, etc. As a result of the application of the provisions of the Land Revenue Act, as amended to the extent mentioned in column 3 of List II of the Schedule to the Zamindari Abolition Act, to the area to which the provisions of the Zamindari Abolition Act are applied, all the various provisions of the Land Revenue Act would be applicable to all the matters dealt with by the Zamindari Abolition Act including applications and proceedings under the said Act. The width and amplitude of the said provision contained in Section 339(c) of the Zamindari Abolition Act cannot, in our opinion, be curtailed by reference to Sections 293 and 341 of the said Act.

12. It is argued that on this construction Section 293 would be rendered otiose and that such an intention cannot be attributed to the legislature. It is no doubt true that as a general rule legislature may be presumed not to make a superfluous provision. But this presumption is not a strong presumption and it is not uncommon to find the legislature inserting superfluous provision under the influence of what may be abundant caution. (See: G.P. Singh on Principles of Statutory Interpretation, 4th Edn., P.51).

13. We may, at this stage, briefly refer to the provisions contained in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act and examine whether the said provisions are of such a nature that they can apply only to applications and proceedings under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act and not to applications and proceedings under the other provisions of the said Act.

14. Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act which contains Sections 189 to 209 bears the heading "Procedure of Revenue Courts and Revenue Officers". Section 189 prescribes the place where the court can be held by the various Revenue Officers. Section 190 empowers the Collector, Settlement Officer, Record Officer and their assistants etc. to enter upon and survey land. Section 191 confers power on the Board of Revenue or the Commissioner to transfer any case or proceedings from a subordinate Revenue Court or Revenue Officer to any other court or officer competent to deal therewith. Section 192 empowers the Collector or Assistant Collector incharge of the sub-division of a district, a Tehsildar, a Record Officer, or a Settlement Officer to transfer cases from his own file to any of his subordinates competent to deal with such cases or to withdraw any class of cases from any Revenue Officer subordinate to him and deal with the same himself. Section 192-A makes provision for consolidation of cases involving substantially the same question for determination and based on the same cause of action pending in one or more court. Section 193 empowers a Revenue Court to summon persons to give evidence and produce documents. Section 195 lays down that the summons should be in writing and sealed and also provides the mode of serving summons as well as for service in district other than that of issue. Section 196 prescribes the mode of serving the notice. Section 197 provides for mode of issuing proclamations. Section 198 provides that a notice and a proclamation shall not be void on account of any error in the name of any person or any designation of any person or in the description of any land referred to therein, unless such error has produced substantial injustice. Section 199 provides for the procedure for procuring attendance of witnesses. Section 200 provides for dismissal of a case in default or for hearing and determination of the same ex parte. Section 201 bars an appeal from an order passed under Section 200 but enables re-hearing of the case on proof of good cause for non-appearance. Section 202 makes provision for correction of error and omission. Sections 203 to 207 deal with the arbitration to which reference has already been made. Section 208 provides for recovery of fines and costs. Section 209 makes provision for delivery of immovable property.

15. All these provisions contained in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act are procedural provisions which are normally applicable to a court required in to adjudicate disputes brought before it. There is nothing in these provisions which may require restricting their application to applications and proceedings under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act. Some of the matters covered by Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act have been dealt with in Chapter XII of the Zamindari Abolition Act but most of the matters referred to in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act are not dealt with in the Zamindari Abolition Act. It cannot be assumed that while enacting the Zamindari Abolition Act the legislature intended that the aforesaid procedural provisions contained in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act would be applicable only to applications and proceedings under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act, but would not be applicable to applications and proceedings under provisions other than Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act. Schedule II to the Zamindari Abolition Act contains a list of applications and proceedings falling in 43 heads which can be initiated under the various provisions of the said Act. Only 5 out of these 43 matters (Sl Nos.39 to 43) relate to applications or proceedings under Chapter X and rest of the items mentioned in Schedule II relate to applications or proceedings under provisions other than Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act. Could it be the intention of the legislature that in the matter of adjudication of applications and proceedings under provisions other than Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act which would be substantially larger in number than those under Chapter X of the said Act, the provisions contained in Chapter IX of the Land Revenue Act should not be available to the revenue courts? Considering this question in the light of the provisions with regard to arbitration of disputes contained in Sections 203 to 207 of the Land Revenue Act we find it difficult to attribute such an intention to the legislature. Arbitration is a recognized mode of settlement of disputes. It enables the parties to resolve their dispute by a tribunal selected by them. The considerations which justify reference to arbitration of disputes arising in applications and proceedings under Chapter X of the Zamindari Abolition Act are equally applicable to applications and proceedings under other provisions of the said Act.

16. For the reasons aforesaid we are of the view that in the judgment under appeal, the High Court has rightly taken the view that the Board of Revenue had ample jurisdiction under Section 203 of the Land Revenue Act to refer to arbitration the dispute involved in the second appeal pending before it which arose out of a suit filed under Section 229-B of the Zamindari Abolition Act. We are unable to endorse the contrary view taken by another learned Judge of the High Court in Sahdeo and Another vs. Deputy Director of Consolidation Varanasi at Allahabad and Others (supra). In the result, the appeal fails and is hereby dismissed with costs.

**********
CROSS CITATION
1987 AIR (SC) 2137
1987 (4) SCC 71
HEADNOTE
CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE, 1908
Section 9 - Maintainability of suits - Dispute regarding identification of boundary between adjacent land - Plaintiff himself uncertain about precise boundary - Suit is one of a civil nature and the courts will have to try the same.
HELD
We do not think that we will be justified in importing into our jurisprudence the technicalities of English law and the distinction made by the english courts between legal estates and equitable estates. In India, the question whether a suit is congnizable by a civil Court is to be decided with reference to Sec. 9 of the Civil Procedure code. If the suit is of a civil nature, the court will have jurisdiction to try the suit unless it is either expressly or impliedly barred. A dispute regarding identification of boundary between two adjacent land owners is certainly a dispute of a civil nature and it is not barred either expressly or impliedly. [Para 2]

CASES REFERRED
1. Lord Keeper Henley in wake v. Conyers [1759 (I) W. & T.L.C.] (7th Edn.) 170.

2.Rayappan v. Yagappan Nadar [1958 Kerala Law Times 955]

3. Kavasji Jamestji v. Horhasji Nassarvanjishet. [ILT 29 Bombay 73]


CHINNAPPA REDDY, J.

1. The defendant is the appellant in this appeal by special leave under Art. 136 of the Constitution. The respondent-plaintiff filed the suit out of which the appeal arises for a decree "(a) specifying and demarcating the property comprised in the plaint schedule as per the terms of the agreement dated June 25, 1960, referred to above, after taking a plan of the property; (b) for a perpetual injunction restraining the defendants and their people from trespassing upon the plaint schedule property and in any other manner interfering with the peaceful possession and enjoyment of the same" and other reliefs. The case of the plaintiff was that he had purchased the plaint schedule property of the extent of 1000 acres from Sha Manikalal Shivraj and Dr. C.C. John under a registered sale deed dated December 30, 1959 after obtaining the permission of the Collector of Kozhikode on January 8,1958. After purchasing the property he obtained permission to fell timber and clear on area of 500 acres. The first defendant who was part owner of the land forming the south-western boundary of the plaint property also obtained a permission to fell trees in an extent of 100 acres lying in his land. Disputes arose between the plaintiff and the defendant as to the precise boundary between the land of the plaintiff and the land of the defendant. Parties however arrived at a settlement and entered into an agreement dated September 25, 1960 by which the manner in which the boundary was to be ascertained was indicated and three arbitrators were nominated to locate the precise boundary in accordance with the agreement. The arbitrators however declined to demarcate the boundary. The plaintiff, therefore, filed a suit for the reliefs mentioned by us earlier. The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court on the ground that suit for the demarcation of the boundary of a property was not maintainable where the plaintiff himself was uncertain about the boundary. During the pendency of the suit the trial court appointed a Commissioner to locate the boundary in the manner indicated by the agreement dated September 25, 1960. The Commissioner did in fact submit a report locating the boundary. The plaintiff preferred an appeal against the dismissal of the suit. The Division Bench consisting of Subramanian Poti and Viswanatha Iyer, JJ reversed the judgment of the Trial Court. They found that there was no bar to the suit or the grant of the relief claimed by the plaintiff. They accepted the report of the Commissioner appointed by the Trial Court and granted a decree in terms of the prayer made by the plaintiff.

2. The only question argued before us by the learned counsel for the appellant was that a suit for demarcating the boundary of property was not maintainable when the plaintiff himself was uncertain about the precise boundary. He placed reliance upon a judgment of the High Court of Bombay in KAVASJI JAMSETJI V. HORHASJI NASSARVANJISHET (ILR 29 Bombay 73) and a judgment of a learned single judge of the Kerala High Court in RAYAPPAN V. YAGAPPAN NADAR (1958 Kerala Law Times 955). In these two cases, the learned Judges purported to follow the statement of LORD KEEPER HENLEY IN WAKE VS. CONYERS (1959 (I) W.& T.L.C. (7th Edn.170) decided in 1759 where he had said, "the court has, in my opinion (and if parties are not satisfied, they have resort elsewhere), no power to fix the boundaries of legal estates, unless some equity is super induced by the act of the parties, as some particular circumstance of fraud, or confusion, where one party has ploughed too near the other, or the like; nor has this Court a power to issue such commissions of course, as here prayed." We do not think that we will be justified in importing into our jurisprudence the technicalities of English law and the distinction made by the English courts between legal estates and equitable estates. In India, the question whether a suit is cognizable by a civil court is to be decided with reference to Sec. 9 of the Civil Procedure code. If the suit is of a civil nature, the court will have jurisdiction to try the suit unless it is either expressly or impliedly barred. A dispute regarding identification of boundary between two adjacent land owners is certainly a dispute of a civil nature and it is not barred either expressly or impliedly. In the judgment under appeal, Poti,J. pointed out:

"We can also state from our experience at the bar that this type of suits are not unfamiliar to this part of our country. In fact in several areas of the state suits for determination of boundaries when the boundaries between the holdings are disputed are a matter of common occurrence and the maintainability of such suits, have not, till recently, been doubted................It is not necessary to further into this question since we see no warrant to follow the english Law based, as it is upon its peculiar historical background. The question in the Indian context is not whether any equitable consideration has to be shown before a plaintiff in a suit gets the relief and, therefore, what was said in the decisions of the english courts on this particular form of action may not have relevance here. As we pointed out earlier in this judgment, the only question that may be relevant to the issue in a suit of this nature in the courts in India is whether the suit is one of a civil nature. Since it is shown that it is, no other question would arise and the courts will have to entertain the suit and try it on the merits. The decision in KAVASJI VS. HORMISJI (supra) which has also been referred to by Veradaja Iyengar J. in RAYAPPAN VS. YAGAPPAN NADAR (supra) has simply purported to follow the english cases without considering how far the law should be applicable to this country. We therefore, are of the view that the decision in RAYAPPAN VS. YAGAPPAN NADAR (supra) has not laid down the correct law and has therefore, to be overruled."

Justice Viswanatha Iyer who agreed with Justice Poti but added a brief note of his own stated:

"Disputes as regard the location of boundary separating adjacent lands of different owners may arise under ever so many circumstances. One common instance is where portion of survey field are transferred or allotted to different persons without mentioning either the side measurements or other necessary measurements to fix the geometrical shape of the plot of the spot. The area and location alone may have been shown in the transfer deed or the partition deed. Without changing the location the area conveyed or allotted may be sought to be located in one or more alternative geometrical shape by one owner. This may clash with the claim of the other person to have his area located in a particular geometrical shape. Again, any one party may wish to have the limits of the area belonging to him demarcated so that he may either enclose the area to prevent trespass or to exercise acts of possession without encroaching into the neighbouring plot. If the other party on demand does not co-operate, a cause of action arises to have the limits of his property determined through court. Again the property conveyed allotted may have been described only with reference to neighbouring properties. Those properties may or may not have been limited in extent and shape to a survey field. In that case, a fixation of the boundary of these properties maybe necessary to fix the boundaries of the properties conveyed or allotted. If there is not cooperation in doing that, that may result in a dispute. These instances are only illustrative and not exhaustive. All these disputes are disputes of a civil nature and they can form the subject matter of a suit under Sec. 9 C.P.C. There is no express or implied bar under any other law.....According to me, whenever there is a dispute between two parties as regards the location of a boundary separating their neighbouring properties and it on a demand to co-operate in fixing that boundary it is not given, a suit will lie at the instance of the demanding party. So I agree with my learned brother that the that the decision in RAYAPPAN V. YAGAPPAN (supra) is not correct and has to be overruled."

3. We agree with the reasoning of Justice Poti, J. and Viswanatha Iyer, J. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed, but in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.

**********
CROSS CITATION
1987 AIR (SC) 1518
1987 (2) SCC 692
1987 (2) SCR 1189
APPEARANCES
Mr. B.R.L. Iyengar, Mr. Soli J. Sorabjee, Mr. S.K.V. Iyenger and Mrs. Shyamala Pappu, Sr. Advocates, Mr. S. Lakshminarasu, Mr. K. Ram Kumar, Mrs. Indira Sawhey and Mr. P.R. Ramasesh, Advocates with them for the Appellants.
Mr. M. Veerappa and Mr. Ashok Sharma, Advocates for the Respondents.
HEADNOTE
KARNATAKA LAND REFORMS ACT, 1961
Sections 2(6), 4 to 43, 44 to 62, 63 to 79, 112, 113, 114 and 118 - Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act 1 of 1974 - Constitution of India, 1950; Articles 31A, 31B, 31C, 39(b) and 39(c) - The Advocates Act, 1961; section 30 - the Indian bar Councils Act, section 14 - Challenge to section 44 as Amended by the Amendment Act - 1974 amendment took away the right of a landlord to resume possession of the tenanted land where he bona fide required the same for personal cultivation - If the tenant is already cultivating the land and that is the source of his livelihood, there is no reason why he should be dispossessed - Qualifications of member of Land Tribunal not specified - the disputes contemplated by s.48A do not appear to be disputes of a nature where the application of a trained judicial mind is absolutely essential - Bar on appearance of advocates before the Tribunals - s.48(8) will not be enforced so as to prevent Advocates from appearing before the Tribunals.
HELD
(i) It is now well recognised by leading economists everywhere that in the absence of common ownership of land and in the existing system of economic relations, the greatest incentive for maximum production is the feeling of identity and security which is possible only if the ownership of the land is with the tiller. It is obviously in recognition of this principle that 'landlordism' was sought to be totally done away with by the amendment of S.5 of the Act by the omission of Secs, 14 and 16 and by the amendment of S.44. If between a landlord who did not himself personally cultivate the land and a tenant who so cultivated the land, the legislature preferred the cultivating tenant, we are unable to hold that such preference is not part of a programme of agrarian reform pursuant to the Directive Principles contained in Arts. 39(b) and (c). We do not have the slightest doubt that the amendment was a law clearly aimed at agrarian reform, to secure the Directive Principles contained in Arts. 39(b) and (c). It is true that one of the conditions subject to which alone a landlord could resume land for personal cultivation under S.16 of the Act was that the income from the land proposed to be cultivated by the landlord on resumption should be the principal source of income for the maintenance of the landlord. But it is important to notice that the question of resumption of land from a tenant would not arise unless a tenant was already cultivating the land. If, therefore, a tenant is already cultivating the land and if, presumably, that is the source of his livelihood, there is no reason why he should be dispossessed to enable a landlord whose source of livelihood it was not until then to make it his principal source of maintenance hereafter. We do not think that any provision of the Amending Act offends the basic structure of the constitution.

(ii) In regard to the constitution of the Tribunal, it was argued that very important questions fell for consideration under S.48A and it was wholly wrong that the decision of such questions should be left, not to a judicial Tribunal, but to a Tribunal consisting of members nominated by the State government with no regard for any qualification....There can be no doubt that while the decision of some disputes require a trained judicial mind to be applied to it, there are many other questions which do not require the application of any trained judicial mind. The disputes contemplated by S.48A do not appear to be disputes of a nature where the application of a trained judicial mind is absolutely essential. We also notice that Land Tribunals have functioned very well in West Bengal and Kerala where under the retrospective State Acts more complicated questions than the ones under s.48A are entrusted to Land Tribunals. The failure of the Land Tribunals to function efficiently in the State of Karnataka has been apparently taken note of by the Legislature itself and the Act has since been amended making provision for an appeal and revision. So much to the credit of the Karnataka Legislature. But we do not see how the failure of some of the land Tribunals to function efficiently can be said to be sufficient to stigmatise wholesale, the functioning of all the Tribunals constituted under the Act and to invalidate the provisions of the Act relating to Tribunals.

(iii) The last submission was in regard to sub-sec.8 of Sec.48 which prohibited legal practitioners from appearing in proceedings before the Tribunals. The argument was that S.48(8) was repugnant to S.30 of the Advocates Act, 1961 and S.14 of the Indian Bar Councils Act. It was said that the State Legislature was not competent to make a law repugnant to laws made by Parliament pursuant to Entries 77 and 78 of List I of the 7th Schedule of the Constitution. The submission of the learned counsel is fully supported by the judgment of a Full Bench of High Court of Punjab and Haryana in JASWANT KAUR V. STATE OF HARYANA AIR 1977 Punjab & Haryana 221. We adopt the reasoning of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana and direct that S.48(8) will not be enforced so as to prevent Advocates from appearing before the Tribunals functioning under the Act. In regard to the decisions already rendered by the Tribunals we do not think that it is necessary to reopen them on the ground that legal practitioners were not allowed to appear before the Tribunals in those cases.

CASES REFERRED
1.Jaswant Kaur v. State of Haryana [AIR 1977 Punjab & Haryana 221]

2. Waman Rao & Ors. v. Union of India [1981 (2) SCR 1]


CHINNAPPA REDDY, J.

1. The question raised in the several appeals is primarily that of the vires of Sec.44 of the Karnataka land Reforms Act, 1961 as amended by the Karnataka Land Reforms(Amendment) Act 1 of 1974. In order to appreciate the submissions made to us, it will be useful to set out the relevant provisions of the Act before it was amended by Act 1 of 1974. Section 2 (6) as it stood before the amendment defined "basic holding" as meaning land which was equal to two standard acres. "Court" was defined to mean the court of Munsif within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the land was situate. "Family holding" was defined as meaning land equal to six standard acres. "Small holder" was defined to mean a land owner owning land not exceeding two basic holdings whose total net annual income including the income from such land did not exceed one thousand two hundred rupees. "Standard acre" was defined to mean one acre of the first class of land or an extent equivalent thereto consisting of any one or more classes of land specified in Part A of Schedule I determined in accordance with the formula in Part B of the said Schedule. Chapter II (Sections 4 to 43) contained 'General provisions relating to Tenancies' and Chapter III (Sections 44 to 62) dealt with 'Conferment of ownership on tenants'. Section 5 prohibited the creation or continuation of any tenancy in respect of any land after the appointed day and barred the leasing of land for any period whatsoever. It was, however, provided that (a) any small holder might create or continue & tenancy or lease the land owned by him and (b) any land owner who was a minor, a widow, an unmarried woman, a person incapable of cultivating land by reason of any physical or mental disability or a soldier in service in the armed forces of the Union or a seaman, might create or continue the tenancy or lease the land owned by him or her. It was further provided that tenancies of resumable lands could be continued until the dispossession of the tenants under S. 14 and of non-resumable land until the date of vesting under S.44 Section 14 provided for resumption of lands from tenants. Sub-section 1, 4 and 6 of S. 14 may be usefully extracted here. Sub-section 2, 3, and 5 do not appear to be necessary for the purposes of the present case. Sub-Sections 1, 4, and 6 were as follows:-

"14. Resumption of land from tenants - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 22 and 43, but subject to the provisions of this section and of sections 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 41, a landlord may, if he bona fide required land, other than land referred to in the first proviso to clause (29) of sub-section (A) of section 2,

(i) for cultivating personally, or

(ii) for any non-agricultural purpose, file with the Court a statement indicating the lands owned by him and which he intends to resume and such other particulars as may be prescribed. On such statement being filed, the Court shall, as soon as may be after giving an opportunity to be heard to the landlord and such of his tenants and other persons as may be affected, and, having due regard to contiguity, fertility and fair distribution of lands, and after making such other inquiries as the Court deems necessary, determine the land or lands, which the landlord shall be entitled to resume, and shall issue a certificate to the landlord to the effect that the land or lands specified in such certificate has been reserved for resumption; and thereupon the right to resume possession shall be exercisable only in respect of the lands specified in such certificate and shall not extend to any other land.

Explanation:- Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Court within the jurisdiction of which the greater part of the land held by the landlord is situated shall be the Court competent to issue a certificate under this section."

(2) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

(3) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

(4) In respect of tenancies existing on the appointed day, as soon as may be after the expiry of fifteen months from the appointed day, as soon as may be after the statement under sub-section (1) is filed, the Court shall after such inquiry as it deems fit, determine the lands which will be non-resumable lands leased to tenants for purpose of this Act."

(5) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where the landlord belongs to any of the following categories, namely:-

(i) minor;

(ii) a person incapable of cultivating land by reason of any physical or mental disability,

(iii) a widow;

(iv) An unmarried woman;

then, the application to the Court for possession of land shall be made, within fifteen months from the appointed day or one year from the date on which-

(a) in the case of category(i), he attains majority;

(b) in the case of category (ii), he ceases to be subject to such physical or mental disability;

(c) in the case of category (iii), she remarries;

(d) in the case of category (iv), she marries whichever is later:

Provided that where land is held by two or more joint landlords, the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply unless all such landlords, belong to the categories specified in clauses (i) and (ii) and the application shall be made within one year from the date on which any one of such category and an application by any one of the joint-holders shall be deemed to be a valid application on behalf of all the joint holders:

Provided further that where a person belonging to any of the categories specified in clause (i) or (ii) of this sub-section, is a member of a joint family belong to the categories specified in clauses (i) and (ii), but where the share in the joint family of a person belonging to any of such categories has been separated by metes and bounds before the filling of the statement under sub-section (i), if the Court on inquiry is satisfied that the share of such person in the land separated, having regard to the area, assessment, classification and value of the land is in the same proportion as the share of that person in the entire joint family property, and not in a larger proportion, the provisions of the sub-section shall be applicable to such persons."

(7) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

(8) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

Section 15 provided for resumption of land by soldiers and seamen. Section 16 prescribed the conditions restricting resumption of land under S. 14. It is necessary to extract the whole of S. 16. It was as follows:-

"16. Conditions restricting resumption of land under Section 14 - The right of a landlord to resume for cultivating the land personally under Section 14, shall be subject to the following conditions, namely:-

(1) If the landlord owns land not exceeding two basic holding he shall be entitled to resume one half of the land leased to the tenant:

Provided that the right to resume by such landlord shall be subject to the conditions that in the case of a protected tenant, such tenant, shall be left with at least one standard acre of the land actually held by him, whichever is less.

(2) If the landlord owns land exceeding two basic holdings, he shall be entitled to resume one-half of the area leased to the tenant, provided that the total area resumed by the landlord does not exceed three family holdings.

(3) No landlord who has been cultivating personally land exceeding three family holdings shall be entitled to resume any land leased.

(4) The right to resume land under clauses (1) to (3) shall be subject to the further condition that the land resumed from all the tenants holding under the landlord together with the extent of land, if any, cultivated by the landlord personally and any non-resumable land held by him shall not exceed three family holdings.

(5) In respect of land cultivated with plantation crops, the landlord shall not be entitled to resume more than one-half of the land leased to a tenant.

(6) If more tenancies than one are held under the same landlord, than the landlord shall be entitled to resume land only from tenants whose tenancy or tenancies are the shortest in point of duration.

Provided that the landlord shall be entitled to resume lands held by protected tenants only if the required extent of land cannot be resumed from tenants other than protected tenants:

Provided further that where such tenancy or tenancies shortest in point of duration shall on resumption leave with the tenants land in extent which will be less than a basic holding, the resumption shall be made in respect of tenancy or tenancies next longer in point of duration.

(7) The right to resume land by the landlord, other than a landlord owning land not exceeding two basic holdings, shall be subject to the further condition that in the case of protected tenants, each protected tenant shall be left with a basic holding or the land actually held by him, whichever is less.

(8) The right to resume land from any tenant shall be exercisable under s.14 only once.

(9) The income by the cultivation of the land of which he is entitled to resume shall be the principal source of income for the maintenance of the landlord.

(10) If as a result of the resumption of land under Section 14, a fragment is created, the person entitled to the larger part of the land shall be entitled to the fragment also.

(10A) If any person has after the 18th November, 1961 and before the appointed day transferred any land, otherwise than by partition, then, in calculating the extent of land owned by such person for purposes of the proceeding clauses, the area so transferred shall be taken into consideration, and land exceeding the resumable area so calculated shall be deemed to be non-resumable land, and such person shall not be entitled to resume such non-resumable land.

Explanation - For purposes of this clause, a land shall be deemed to have been transferred, if it has been transferred by act of parties (whether by sale, gift, mortgage with possession, exchange, lease or any other disposition) made inter vivas.

(10B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (1) to (10) (both inclusive), or S. 142, the extent of land, if any, resumable, by any landlord in Bombay Area shall be subject to the restrictions and conditions specified in Section 31A, 31B, and 31C of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, as inserted by the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Amendment) Act 1955 (Bombay Act 13 of 1956), notwithstanding the provisions of the Bombay Tenancy (Suspension of Provisions and Amendment) Act, 1957 (Mysore Act 13 of 1957).

(10C) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (1) to (10), both inclusive), or S. 142, the extent of land, if any, resumable, by any landlord in the Hyderabad Area, shall be subject to the restrictions and conditions specified in the Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1950, as in force in the Hyderabad Area on the 1st November 1956.

(ii) No landlord who at any time before the appointed day had resumed land from any tenant from personal cultivation under the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, or the Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1950, shall be entitled to resume again under section 14 and land left with the same tenant."

Section 44 provided for the vesting of certain lands in the State Government. Sub-sec.1 was as follows:

"(1) As soon as may be after the determination of the non- resumable lands under sub-section (4) of Section 14, by each Court, the State Government may by notification declare that with effect from such date as may be specified in such notification (hereinafter referred to as to date of vesting) all the non-resumable lands determined by such Court which are leased to tenants, whether protected or otherwise, and all lands leased to permanent and other tenants referred to in the first proviso to clause (29) of sub-section (a) of Section 2 in the area within jurisdiction of such Court shall stand transferred to and vest in the State Government."

Section 45 provided for the registration of tenants as occupants of land on certain conditions. Section 47 provided for the payment of compensation to the land owner in regard to the extinguishment of rights in land vesting in the State Government under S.44. Chapter IV(Sections 63 to 79) dealt with 'ceiling on land holdings'. Section 63 prescribed the ceiling on the extent of land which any person may hold either as a land-owner, landlord or tenant or as a mortgagee with possession or otherwise or partly in one capacity and partly in another. Section 68 provided further 'vesting of land surrendered by the owner in the State Government.' Section 72 provided for payment of compensation for land surrendered to and vested in the State Government. We are not concerned with Chapters V, VI, VII, and VIII. Chapter IX dealt with 'Procedure and Jurisdiction of Court and Appeals'. Section 112 prescribed the duties of the Court and among the duties were "(g) to issue a certificate relating to reservation of land for resumption under sub-section (1) of S. 14 and (h) to determine the non-resumable lands under sub-sec.(4) of Sec. 14." Sections 113, 114 and 115 provided for enquiry by the Court and the procedure to be adopted. Section 118 provided for an appeal from the Court to the District Court.

2. The broad scheme of the provisions mentioned or set out above was that there was not only to be a ceiling on the holding of land, the system of leasing of land was to be abolished and cultivating tenants were to be invested with rights of ownership. However, certain limited classes of cases were recognised where leases were permitted on the one hand and on the other tenants were deprived of the right to remain in possession of the land. It was provided that leases were permissible in cases when the landlord was under some disability as specified in S.5. It was also provided that a land owner could seek, subject to the prescribed limits, resumption of land from tenants, if he bona fide required the land for cultivating personally or for any non-agricultural purpose. The right to resume land for personal cultivation was no doubt subject to several severe conditions, one of the most important of which was that the income by the cultivation of the land which he was entitled to resume should be the principal source of income for the maintenance of the land owner. In other words, the Act while fixing a ceiling on the holding of land and generally conferring ownership rights on tenants, did not altogether ignore the interests of the smaller landlords and did in fact offer some measure of protection to those who desired to personally cultivate the tenanted land.

3. The Act was substantially amended in 1974. 'Basic holding' and 'family holding' ceased to be defined. "Ceiling area" was defined to mean the extent of land which the person or family was entitled to hold under S.63. Section 5 was amended and the provisos were omitted. It was however provided by sub-sec 2 that the prohibition against creation of tenancies or leases would not apply to tenancies created by a soldier or a seaman. The savings in respect of a minor widow or a minor woman under the original Sec.5 was taken away. Section 14 was omitted. Section 16 was also omitted. Section 44 was amended. The new sub-section 1 of Sec.44 is as follows:-

"44(1) All lands held by or in the possession of tenants (including tenants against whom a decree or order for eviction or a certificate for resumption is made or issued) immediately prior to the date of commencement of the Amendment Act, other than lands held by them under leases permitted under Section 5, shall, with effect on and from the said date, stand transferred to and vest in the State Government."

A new Section 48 was introduced providing for the Constitution of Tribunals, a Tribunal for each taluq consisting of the Assistant Commissioner of the Revenue Division and four other members to be nominated by the State Government of whom one shall be a person belonging to the schedules casts or scheduled tribes. No qualifications were prescribed for the nomination of persons to membership of the Tribunal. Sub-section 8 of Section 48 provided that no legal practitioner shall be allowed to appear in any proceeding before the Tribunal. Section 48A dealt with the procedure to be adopted by the Tribunal in its enquiry into applications made under S.45 for registration of a person as an occupant. Sec. 112A provided for the duties of the Tahsildar and S.112B provided for the duties of the Tribunals. The provision for an appeal from the decision of the Court and the further right of revision under the amended Act were taken away and there was no right of appeal or revision against the decision of the Tribunal. Thus, we see that the 1974 Amending Act took away the right which, was saved by the original Act in favour of the widow, unmarried woman, minor and disabled person to create a tenancy or lease the land. The more important right which was taken away by the 1974 Amendment was the right of the landlord to resume the land if he bona fide required the land for personal cultivation or for a non-agricultural purpose. The right to resume the land if he bona fide required the land for personal cultivation was denied by the Amending Act even if the income by the cultivation of the land which he was entitled to resume was the principal source of income for the maintenance of the landlord.

4. The principal submission of the learned counsel for the appellants was that the 1974 amendment in so far as it took away the right of a landlord to resume possession of the tenanted land where he bona fide required the land for personal cultivation and had no other principal source of income for his own maintenance, was ultra vires, notwithstanding its inclusion in the Ninth Schedule, as it offended the basic structure of the Constitution. Another submission which was made by the learned counsel was that the provision for the constitution of a Tribunal consisting of person with unspecified qualifications in the place of a Court was similarly ultra vires the powers of the State Legislature. The third submission of the learned counsel was that S.47(8) which excluded legal practitioner from appearing before the Tribunals was in conflict with S.30 of the Advocates' Act and had therefore, to yield.

5. It is necessary for us to mention here that the principal Act was included in the IXth Schedule of the Constitution on October 20, 1965 and the Amendment Act of 1974 was similarly included in the IXth Schedule on September 7, 1974.

6. We do not think that it is necessary to hark back to the decisions of this court rendered prior to the one in WAMAN RAO & ORS. V. UNION OF INDIA 1981 (2) SCR 1. One of the petitioner who presented his case in person did argue that WAMAN RAO'S case to the extent that it upheld Arts. 31-A, 31-B and 31-C and to the extent that it uphold the validity of the legislations impugned therein required reconsideration. We do not agree that it is necessary either to reconsider or to go behind Waman Rao for the purposes of this case. Chandrachud, CJ, speaking for the majority of the judges of the Constitution Bench stated their conclusions in regard to Arts. 31-A, 31-B and 31-C as follows:-

"(1) The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 which introduced Article 31A into the Constitution with retrospective effect and Section 3 of the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955 which substituted a new clause (1), sub-clause (a) to (b), for the original clause (1) with retrospective effect, do not damage any of the basic or essential features of the Constitution or its basic structure and are valid and constitutional being within the constituent power of the Parliament.

(2) Section 5 of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act 1951 introduced Article 31B into the Constitution which reads thus:

"31B xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

In Keshavananda Bharti (1973, Suppl., SCR 1) decided on April 24, 1973 it was held by the majority that Parliament has no power to amend the Constitution so as to damage or destroy its basic or essential features or its basic structure. We hold that all amendments to the Constitution which were made before April 24, 1973 and by which the 9th Schedule to Constitution was amended from time to time by the inclusion of various Acts and Regulations therein, are open to challenge on the ground that they, or any one or more of them, are beyond constituent power of the Parliament since they damage the basic or essential features of the Constitution of its basic structure. We do not pronounce upon the validity of such subsequent Constitutional amendments except to say that if any Act Regulation included in the 9th Schedule by Constitutional amendment made on or after April 24, 1973 is saved by Article 31A, or by Article 310 as it stood prior to its amendment by the 42nd Amendment, the challenge to the validity of the relevant Constitutional Amendment by which that Act or Regulation is put in the 9th Schedule, on the ground that the Amendment damages or destroys a basic or essential feature of the Constitutional or its basic structure as reflected in Articles 14, 19 or 31, will become otiose.

(3) Article 31C of the Constitution, as it stood prior to its amendment by Section 4 of the Constitution (42 Amendment), Act, 1976, is valid to the extent to which its constitutionality was upheld in Keshavananda Bharti. Article 31C, as it stood prior to the Constitution (42 Amendment) Act does not damage any of the basic or essential features of the Constitution or its basic structure.

(4) All the Writ Petitions and Review Petitions relating to the validity of the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands Ceiling Acts are dismissed with costs."

7. In the course of the submission, the learned counsel suggested that the 1974 Amendment Act was not a law pertaining to agrarian reform; nor it was said, was it a law directed towards securing that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community were so distributed as best to subserve the common goods or the operation of the economic system did not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment. It was suggested that the 1974 Amendment Act far from setting out to achieve these goals set out in quite opposite direction by seeking to reduce to destitution small landlords whose sole means of livelihood was the tenanted land which they were allowed to resume for personal cultivation. It was said that the original Act was very fair as it recognised poverty amongst landlords as well as poverty amongst tenants and afforded a measures of protection to the poorer sections of the landlords. We are unable to agree with the submissions that the Amendment is not aimed at agrarian reform or at securing the objectives mentioned in Arts. 39(b) and (c) of the Constitution. It is too late in the day to contend that, in the existing system of economic relations, ownership of land to the tiller of the land is not the best way of securing that utmost utilisation of land, a material resource of the community for the common good of the entire community. It is now well recognised by leading economists every where that in the absence of common ownership of land and in the existing system of economic relations, the greatest incentive for maximum production is the feeling of identity and security which is possible only if the ownership of the land is with the tiller. It is obviously in recognition of this principle that 'landlordism' was sought to be totally done away with by the amendment of S.5 of the Act, by the omission of secs, 14 and 16 and by the amendment of S.44. If between a landlord who did not himself personally cultivate the land and a tenant who so cultivated the land, the legislature preferred the cultivating tenant, we are unable to hold that such preference is not part of a programme of agrarian reform pursuant to the Directive Principles contained in Arts. 39(b) and (c). We do not have the slightest doubt that the amendment was a law clearly aimed at agrarian reform, to secure the Directive Principles contained in Arts. 39(b) and (c). It is true that one of the conditions subject to which alone a landlord could resume land for personal cultivation under S.16 of the Act was that the income from the land proposed to be cultivated by the landlord on resumption should be the principal source of income for the maintenance of the landlord. But it is important to notice that the question of resumption of land from a tenant would not arise unless a tenant was already cultivating the land. If, therefore, a tenant is already cultivating the land and if, presumably, that is the source of his livelihood, there is no reason why he should be dispossessed to enable a landlord whose source of livelihood it was not until then to make it his principal source of maintenance hereafter. We do not think that any provision of the Amending Act offends the basic structure of the Constitution.

8. In regard to the Constitution of the tribunal, it was argued that very important questions fell for consideration under S.48A and it was wholly wrong that the decision of such questions should be left, not to a judicial Tribunal, but to a Tribunal consisting of members nominated by the State Government with no regard for any qualification. Our attention was invited to several decisions of the Karnataka High Court where the functioning of such ill-constituted Tribunals was exposed and castigated. It is true that it was commented in some of those cases that the Tribunals were functioning in a most unjudicial manner, quite often without applying their minds at all to the questions at issue and in some cases, in utter violation of the principles of natural justice. We are unable to see how the mal-functioning of some of the Tribunals can possibly vitiate the provision relating to the Constitution of the Tribunal and the entrustment of the decision of certain issues to the Tribunal. We do not want to enter into a discussion of the question whether a lay Tribunal cannot function more efficiently than a judicial Tribunal in resolving certain peculiar questions. There can be no doubt that while the decision of some disputes require a trained judicial mind to be applied to it, there are many other questions which do not require the application of any trained judicial mind. The disputes contemplated by S.48A do not appear to be disputes of a nature where the application of a trained judicial mind is absolutely essential. We also notice that Land Tribunals have functioned very well in West Bengal and Kerala where under the retrospective State Acts more complicated questions than the ones under S.48A are entrusted to Land Tribunals. The failure of the Land Tribunals to function efficiently in the State of Karnataka has been apparently taken note of by the Legislature itself and the Act has since been amended making provision for an appeal and revision. So much to the credit of the Karnataka Legislature. But we do not see how the failure of some of the land Tribunals to function efficiently can be said to be sufficient to stigmatise wholesale, the functioning of all the Tribunals constituted under the Act and to invalidate the provisions of the Act relating to Tribunals.

9. The last submission was in regard to sub-sec.8 of Sec.48 which prohibited legal practitioners from appearing in proceedings before the Tribunals. The argument was that s.48(8) was repugnant to S.30 of the Advocates Act, 1961 and S.14 of the Indian Bar Councils Act. It was said that the State Legislature was not competent to make a law repugnant to laws made by Parliament pursuant to Entries 77 and 78 of List I of the 7th Schedule of the Constitution. The submission of the learned counsel is fully supported by the judgment of a Full Bench of High Court of Punjab and Haryana in JASWANT KAUR V. STATE OF HARYANA AIR 1977 Punjab & Haryana 221. We adopt the reasoning of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana and direct that S.48(8) will not be enforced so as to prevent Advocates from appearing before the Tribunals functioning under the Act. In regard to the decisions already rendered by the Tribunals we do not think that it is necessary to reopen them on the ground that legal practitioners were not allowed to appear before the Tribunals in those cases. All the civil appeals are, therefore, dismissed, in the circumstances without cost.

Appeal dismissed.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2011 AIR (SC) 1899
2011 (11) SCC 375
APPEARANCES
Mr. R.K. Kapoor, Ms. Sanjana Bali, Mr. Harish Chandra Pant, Ms. Sweta Kapoor, Mr. Anis Ahmed Khan, Advocates, for the Appellant(s).
Mr. Keerthi Prabhakar, Mr. Aniruddha P. Mayee, Advocates, for the Respondent(s).


HEADNOTE
ARBITRATION
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
Sections 11, 2 - Appointment of Arbitrator - Arbitration agreement - Existence of - Developer entering into agreement with land owners - One 'T' also a party, who wanted to purchase undivided share in land - Developer agreeing to construct residential apartment for 'T' - On request of 'T', bank sanctioning loan under tripartite agreement with him as borrower and with developer as guarantor - Agreement to disburse loan amount directly to developer - Land owners executing registered sale deed on 21.02.2008 conveying undivided share in land - On same date, construction agreement between 'T' and developer to construct apartment and deliver it to 'T' by 16.10.2008, made - Said agreement contained arbitration clause - On default, 'T' issued notice to developer - In absence of reply, petition filed in High Court - Bank brought as party for the first time - If arbitration against bank can be said to be in existence - Presence of arbitration clause in agreement between 'T' and bank. Held that appointing arbitrator against a person who is not a party to arbitration agreement, would be against contract and law. Orders of High Court appointing Arbitrator against bank, set aside.
HELD
The question is whether the appellant, a non-party to the construction agreement containing the arbitration agreement as per clause (7), could be roped in, as a party to such arbitration. The first respondent made a demand for damages against the developer in his notice dated 31.7.2009. As the developer refused to comply, the first respondent invoked the arbitration agreement contained in clause (7) of the Construction Agreement dated 21.2.2008 between him and the developer. Therefore, in so far as the disputes between the first respondent and the developer (second respondent) are concerned, the designate of the Chief Justice was justified in appointing an arbitrator. (Para 11)
A dispute can be said to arise only when one party to the arbitration agreement makes or asserts a claim/demand against the other party to the arbitration agreement and the other party refuses/denies such claim or demand. If a party to an arbitration agreement, files a petition under section 11 of the Act impleading the other party to the arbitration agreement as also a non-party to the arbitration agreement as respondents, and the court merely appoints an Arbitrator without deleting or excluding the non-party, the effect would be that all parties to the petition under section 11 of the Act (including the non-party to arbitration agreement) will be parties to the arbitration. That will be contrary to the contract and the law. (Para 13)
The appellant was not a party to the said construction agreement dated 21.2.2008 containing the arbitration agreement. It is no doubt true that the loan agreement dated 21.12.2006 between the first respondent as borrower, and the appellant as the creditor, also contains an arbitration clause (vide Article 11) providing for resolution of disputes in regard to the said loan agreement by arbitration. But the developer was not a party to the loan agreement. There is no arbitration agreement between the developer and the appellant. The disputes between the first respondent and the developer cannot be arbitrated under Article 11 of the Loan Agreement. The first respondent invoked the arbitration agreement contained in clause 7 of the construction agreement (between first respondent and developer) and not the arbitration agreement contained in clause 11 of the loan agreement (between appellant and first respondent). The existence of an arbitration agreement in a contract between appellant and first respondent, will not enable the first respondent to implead the appellant as a party to an arbitration in regard to his disputes with the developer. (Para 14)
The first respondent has also alleged that the appellant by releasing the payments to the developer without verifying the ground realities about the progress and construction and without intimation to him, had committed breach of trust and therefore liable to pay compensation for the financial and mental suffering of the first respondent as also the legal and other expenses. No such claim was ever been made against the appellant before filing the petition under section 11 of the Act, nor did the first respondent at any time seek arbitration in regard to such claims against the appellant. The said claims against the appellant cannot be arbitrated in an arbitration in pursuance of clause (7) of the construction agreement between the first respondent and the developer. (Para 15)
It could not be said that any dispute existed between the first respondent and appellant, when the petition under section 11 of the Act was filed. Even in the application under section 11 of the Act, there is no reference to clause No.(11) of the loan agreement which contains the arbitration agreement in regard to disputes that may arise between the appellant as lender and the first respondent as the borrower. There is no claim or dispute in regard to the loan agreement. (Para 16)

CASES REFERRED
     1.    S.N. Prasad v. Monnet Finance Ltd. [JT 2010 (11) SC 479] (Para 12.2.)
     2.    Yogi Agarwal v. Inspiration Clothes & U [JT 2009 (1) SC 440] (Para 12.1.)
     3.    Jagdish Chander v. Ramesh Chander [JT 2007 (6) SC 375] (Para 12)


R.V. RAVEENDRAN, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. The second respondent (referred to as the 'Developer') entered into a development agreement with the owners of certain lands at Bachupally village, Qutubullapur Mandal, Ranga Reddy District, for constructing independent houses and multistoried Apartment buildings with common facilities in a layout known as 'Hill County township'. The landowners as the first party, the developer as the second party and the first respondent who wanted to acquire an apartment therein as the third party entered into an agreement for sale dated 16.10.2006 under which the land-owners agreed to sell an undivided share equivalent to 87 sq.yds. out of a total extent of 16.95 acres to the first respondent and the developer agreed to construct a residential apartment measuring 1889 sq.ft. for the first respondent. The total consideration for the undivided share in the land, apartment and car parking space was agreed as Rs.55,89,368. The agreement contemplating the entire price being paid in installments, that is 10% on booking, 85% in seven installments upto 15.3.2008 and 5% at the time of delivery. Clause (14) of the said agreement dated 16.10.2006 provided for settlement of disputes by arbitration.
3. On the request of the first respondent, the appellant (earlier known as 'BHW Home Finance Ltd.') sanctioned a housing loan of Rs.52 lakhs to the first respondent for purchase of the said apartment in terms of a loan agreement dated 21.12.2006 entered into between the first respondent as the borrower and the appellant as the lender. The said loan agreement contained the terms of the loan, rate of interest, provisions for amortization, consequences of delay in payment of EMIs, security for repayment, and general covenants of borrower. Clause (11) thereof provided for settlement of all disputes (that is, all matters, questions, disputes, differences and/or claims arising out of and/or concerning and/or in connection and/or in consequences of breaches, termination or invalidity thereof or relating to the Agreement) by arbitration by the Managing Director of the appellant or his nominee as sole Arbitrator. The first respondent subsequently had entered into a supplemental loan agreement with the appellant on 29.10.2007 for reducing the loan amount from Rs.52 lakhs to Rs.49,78,527/-; and the said loan has been disbursed in terms of the said loan agreements.
4. It is alleged that a tripartite agreement was also executed on 21.12.2006 among first respondent as borrower, the developer as guarantor and the appellant as the lender, under which it was agreed that the loan amount should be disbursed by the appellant directly to the developer and such amounts paid to the developer shall be deemed to be disbursement of loan by the appellant to the first respondent.
5. In pursuance of the agreement of sale dated 16.10.2006, the first respondent paid the entire sale price to the developer through the appellant. Thereafter, the land-owners and the developer executed a registered sale deed dated 21.2.2008 for a consideration Rs.21,27,409/-, conveying to the first respondent, an undivided share in the land equivalent to 87 sq.yds. with the semi finished apartment bearing No.3E in the third floor of Nainital Block of Hill County with one reserved parking space. On the same day the first respondent entrusted the construction of the unfinished flat to the developer under a construction agreement dated 21.2.2008, under which the developer acknowledged the receipt of the total cost of construction, that is Rs.33,22,226 from the first respondent and agreed to complete the construction of the apartment and deliver the same to the first respondent by 16.10.2008 with a grace period of three months. Clause 7 of the said construction agreement dated 21.2.2008 between the first respondent and the developer provided for arbitration and is extracted below:
            " 7. Arbitration
            a. In the event of any dispute between the parties in connection with the validity, interpretation, implementation or breach of any provision of this agreement or any other disputes including the question of whether there is proper termination of the agreement shall be resolved through arbitration by appointing a sole arbitrator by the Vice Chairman of the First Party. The decision of the Arbitrator shall be final and binding on both the parties.
            b. The arbitration proceedings shall be in accordance with the provisions laid down in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and shall be governed by the laws in A.P. subject to the authorized arbitration clauses. The venue of the Arbitration proceedings shall be Hyderabad and the language shall be in English. All the proceedings are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts at Hyderabad limits."
5.1. On the execution of the sale deed dated 21.2.2008 and construction agreement dated 21.2.2008, the earlier agreement for sale dated 16.10.2006 apparently lost its relevance, as the land-owners went out of the picture on execution of the sale deed regarding the undivided share and a fresh construction agreement dated 21.2.2008 was executive regarding completion of the apartment by the developer.
6. The first respondent issued a notice dated 31.7.2009 to the developer, alleging delay in construction and delivery of the apartment and called upon it to pay Rs.54,778 per month as compensation for the period of delay, that is from the due date of completion (16.10.2008) till date of actual completion and delivery of the apartment. By another letter dated 15.9.2009 addressed to the developer, first respondent invoked the arbitration clause contained in clause (7) of the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008 and sought reference of the disputes between them to arbitration. There was no response from the developer.
7. Thereafter, the first respondent filed a petition under section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 ("Act" for short) in the Andhra Pradesh High Court, for appointment of an Arbitrator. In the said petition, the appellant was brought into the dispute, for the first time, by impleading it as a respondent along with the developer. In the said petition, the first respondent alleged that the developer had failed to complete and deliver the apartment in terms of the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008. He also alleged that the developer had arranged the housing loan from the appellant; and that the appellant-lender had released the total loan amount to the developer without ensuring that there was sufficient progress of construction and without verifying the 'ground realities' and thereby failed to perform its minimum obligations and responsibilities as a lender. He contended that the circumstances disclosed collusion, fraud and misrepresentation on the part of the developer and the appellant. First respondent further alleged that the following disputes had arisen between him on the one hand, and the respondents therein (the developer and the appellant) on the other, which required to be decided by arbitration:
            a) The developer committed breach of contract in not fulfilling its part of contractual obligations and consequently was liable to refund all the amounts collected from him and the appellant, together with interest thereon at 24% per annum with monthly rests from the date of its respective dates of collections till payment, besides the interest and damages that may be charged by the appellant.
            b) The appellant clandestinely and deliberately released the entire payments to the developer without verifying the ground realities about the progress of construction and without intimation to him (first respondent) and thus committed breach of trust and was liable for all consequences.
            c) In view of the breach of trust and non-fulfillment of the obligations, the developer was also liable to pay a sum of Rs.15 lakhs towards miscellaneous expenditure incurred and mental agony suffered by the petitioner.
            d) The developer was also liable to pay/reimburse whatsoever that may be demanded by the appellant in respect of the entire transaction.
            e) The developer and the appellant were liable to pay the first respondent all the expenditure incurred/to be incurred towards legal and other miscellaneous charges.
            f) The developer and the appellant were liable to compensate him for his financial and mental suffering.
            g) The developer and the appellant were liable to pay commercial rate of interest to the first respondent on the amounts found due from the due date till payment.
7.1. The first respondent relying upon clause (7) of the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008, sought appointment of a sole arbitrator to adjudicate upon the disputes between him and the developer and the appellant in respect of purchase of the apartment.
8. The said petition was resisted by the appellant. The appellant contended that it had nothing to do with the dispute between first respondent and developer; that for the first time, the first respondent had chosen to make allegations against the appellant in the petition under section 11 of the Act, apparently in collusion with the developer, to avoid payment of EMIs due to the appellant; and that the petition under section 11 of the Act was not maintainable against it, as the dispute was between the first respondent and the developer (second respondent) and it was not a party to the arbitration agreement invoked by the first respondent (that is clause 7 of the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008).
9. The designate of the Chief Justice of Andhra Pradesh High Court by the impugned order dated 12.4.2010 allowed the said application under section 11 and appointed a retired Judge of High Court as the sole arbitrator. The learned designate referred to the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008 between the first respondent and second respondent and clause (7) therein providing for arbitration. The said order did not refer to the contention of the appellant that it was not a party to the dispute and therefore the petition under section 11 was not maintainable against it. In view of the impugned order, the appellant though not concerned with the disputes between the first respondent and the developer, is made a party to the arbitration.
10. The said order is challenged by the appellant urging the following contentions:
            (i) As the first respondent and the developer were the only parties to the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008 containing the arbitration agreement, the appellant could not be dragged into a dispute between them, by impleading it as a party to the petition under section 11 of the Act.
            (ii) The designate of the Chief Justice ought to have examined whether both respondents in the petition under section 11 of the Act were parties to the arbitration agreement (clause 7 of the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008) before making an order appointing an arbitrator under section 11 of the Act.
10.1. On the contentions urged, the question that arises for our consideration is whether the appellant could be made a party to the arbitration, even though the appellant was not a party to the arbitration agreement contained in clause (7) of the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008.
11. In this case, the first respondent made a demand for damages against the developer in his notice dated 31.7.2009. As the developer refused to comply, the first respondent invoked the arbitration agreement contained in clause (7) of the Construction Agreement dated 21.2.2008 between him and the developer. Therefore, in so far as the disputes between the first respondent and the developer (second respondent) are concerned, the designate of the Chief Justice was justified in appointing an arbitrator. But the question is whether the appellant, a non-party to the construction agreement containing the arbitration agreement as per clause (7), could be roped in, as a party to such arbitration.
12. In Jagdish Chander v. Ramesh Chander [JT 2007 (6) SC 375 : 2007 (5) SCC 719] this court held :
            "The existence of an arbitration agreement as defined under Section 7 of the Act is a condition precedent for exercise of power to appoint an arbitrator/Arbitral Tribunal, under Section 11 of the Act by the Chief Justice or his designate. It is not permissible to appoint an arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the parties in the absence of an arbitration agreement or mutual consent."
12.1. In Yogi Agarwal v. Inspiration Clothes & U [JT 2009 (1) SC 440 : 2009 (1) SCC 372], this court observed:
            "When Sections 7 and 8 of the Act refer to the existence of an arbitration agreement between the parties, they necessarily refer to an arbitration agreement in regard to the current dispute between the parties or the subject-matter of the suit. It is fundamental that a provision for arbitration, to constitute an arbitration agreement for the purposes of Sections 7 and 8 of the Act, should satisfy two conditions. Firstly, it should be between the parties to the dispute. Secondly, it should relate to or be applicable to the dispute."
12.2. In S.N. Prasad v. Monnet Finance Ltd. [JT 2010 (11) SC 479], this Court held:
            "There can be reference to arbitration only if there is an arbitration agreement between the parties. If there is a dispute between a party to an arbitration agreement, with other parties to the arbitration agreement as also non-parties to the arbitration agreement, reference to arbitration or appointment of arbitration can be only with respect to the parties to the arbitration agreement and not the non-parties........As there was no arbitration agreement between the parties, the impleading of the appellant as a respondent in the proceedings and the award against the appellant in such arbitration cannot be sustained."
12.3. Therefore, if 'X' enters into two contracts, one with 'M' and another with 'D', each containing an arbitration clause providing for settlement of disputes arising under the respective contract, in a claim for arbitration by 'X' against 'M' in regard to the contract with 'M', 'X' cannot implead 'D' as a party on the ground that there is an arbitration clause in the agreement between 'X' and 'D'.
13. The existence of an arbitration agreement between the parties to the petition under section 11 of the Act and existence of dispute/s to be referred to arbitration are conditions precedent for appointing an Arbitrator under section 11 of the Act. A dispute can be said to arise only when one party to the arbitration agreement makes or asserts a claim/demand against the other party to the arbitration agreement and the other party refuses/denies such claim or demand. If a party to an arbitration agreement, files a petition under section 11 of the Act impleading the other party to the arbitration agreement as also a non-party to the arbitration agreement as respondents, and the court merely appoints an Arbitrator without deleting or excluding the non-party, the effect would be that all parties to the petition under section 11 of the Act (including the non-party to arbitration agreement) will be parties to the arbitration. That will be contrary to the contract and the law. If a person who is not a party to the arbitration agreement is impleaded as a party to the petition under section 11 of the Act, the court should either delete such party from the array of parties, or when appointing an Arbitrator make it clear that the Arbitrator is appointed only to decide the disputes between the parties to the arbitration agreement.
14. The arbitration agreement relied upon by the first respondent to seek appointment of arbitrator, is clause (7) of the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008. The appellant was not a party to the said construction agreement dated 21.2.2008 containing the arbitration agreement. It is no doubt true that the loan agreement dated 21.12.2006 between the first respondent as borrower, and the appellant as the creditor, also contains an arbitration clause (vide Article 11) providing for resolution of disputes in regard to the said loan agreement by arbitration. But the developer was not a party to the loan agreement. There is no arbitration agreement between the developer and the appellant. The disputes between the first respondent and the developer cannot be arbitrated under Article 11 of the Loan Agreement. The first respondent invoked the arbitration agreement contained in clause 7 of the construction agreement (between first respondent and developer) and not the arbitration agreement contained in clause 11 of the loan agreement (between appellant and first respondent). The existence of an arbitration agreement in a contract between appellant and first respondent, will not enable the first respondent to implead the appellant as a party to an arbitration in regard to his disputes with the developer.
15. The first respondent obviously cannot involve the appellant as a party to an arbitration in regard to his disputes arising out of the claims made by him against the developer which are covered by clause (7) of the construction agreement. The disputes referred to in the petition under section 11 of the Act relate to the claims of the first respondent against the developer. It is however true that there is reference to the appellant in disputes (b), (e) and (f) and reference to collusion between the developer and the appellant in those 'disputes'. The first respondent has also alleged that the appellant by releasing the payments to the developer without verifying the ground realities about the progress and construction and without intimation to him, had committed breach of trust and therefore liable to pay compensation for the financial and mental suffering of the first respondent as also the legal and other expenses. No such claim was ever been made against the appellant before filing the petition under section 11 of the Act, nor did the first respondent at any time seek arbitration in regard to such claims against the appellant. The said claims against the appellant cannot be arbitrated in an arbitration in pursuance of clause (7) of the construction agreement between the first respondent and the developer.
16. The first respondent did not issue any notice or demand making any claim against the appellant nor did he issue any notice claiming that the appellant is liable for the consequences of non-performance by the developer, of its obligations. Nor did the first respondent issue any notice to the appellant seeking reference of any disputes to arbitration. Therefore it could not be said that any dispute existed between the first respondent and appellant, when the petition under section 11 of the Act was filed. Even in the application under section 11 of the Act, there is no reference to clause No.(11) of the loan agreement which contains the arbitration agreement in regard to disputes that may arise between the appellant as lender and the first respondent as the borrower. There is no claim or dispute in regard to the loan agreement. The first respondent has not invoked clause (11) of the loan agreement for deciding any dispute with the appellant.
17. If there had been an arbitration clause in the tripartite agreement among the first respondent, developer and the appellant, and if the first respondent had made claims or raised disputes against both the developer and the appellant with reference to such tripartite agreement, the position would have been different. But that is not so. The petition under section 11 of the Act against the appellant was therefore misconceived as the appellant was not a party to the construction agreement dated 21.2.2008.
18. In view of the above, we allow this appeal and set aside the order dated 12.4.2010 of the designate of the Chief Justice, in part, in so far as the appellant is concerned. We make it clear that the appointment of arbitrator under the impugned order shall remain undisturbed in so far as the disputes between first respondent and the second respondent (developer) are concerned. We further make it clear that this order will not come in the way of first respondent making any claim or raising a dispute against the appellant or appellant making any claim or raising a dispute against the first respondent and either of them seeking recourse to arbitration in regard to such disputes.
**********
HEADNOTE
ARBITRATION
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
Section 11 - Appointment of Arbitrator - Facts and circumstances - "A" working in U.S.A. - Contacted 'N' and represented about good prospects of business in water and amusement park in India - "V" alongwith another person remitted US $ 6,40,000 to "A" and his wife "G" - Separate MOU entered into between "V" and its partner and between "A" and "G" who formed a private company - Agreement to allot 1,67,000 Equity Shares of Rs.100/- each as fully paid up share to "V" and its partners whereas the remaining shares were to be held by partner of "V" and "A" representing 60% holding - Further agreement to transfer 10 acres of land out of 25 Acres owned by "G" in lieu of 40% contribution by "V" - Said agreement dated 29.01.2005 contained Arbitration Clause - Subsequently "G" undertook to transfer the entire piece of land of 25 Acres vide Supplementary Agreement dated 02.02.2005 - "G" later on refused to transfer - Thereafter "A" and "G" called a Board Meeting which "V" and its partners did not know - In the said meeting "A" and "G" resolved to wound up water park business of the company and transferred the same to some close relatives alongwith land - "V" sent legal notice and named an arbitrator asking "A" and "G" to appoint their arbitrator - No action taken by them - If disputes have arisen between the parties and the arbitrator is liable to be appointed. Held that disputes have arisen between the parties which need to be adjudicated and decided by an Arbitrator. Hence Arbitrator appointed. (Paras 8 to 15)


DALVEER BHANDARI, J.

1. This application has been filed by the applicant under section 11(5) read with section 11(9) and section 11(12) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of an arbitrator for adjudicating and deciding the disputes which have arisen between the applicant and the respondents in respect of the implementation and working of agreements entered into between the applicant and the respondent no.3 on the one hand and respondent nos.1 and 2 on the other hand on 29.1.2005 and the supplementary agreement between the same parties on 2.2.2005.

2. The applicant is a citizen of the United States of America and is a person of Indian origin.

3. Respondent no.3, Dr. Vinod Kaura is the husband of the applicant, Vanna Claire Kaura.

4. Respondent no.2, Anil Indulkar was doing business in Pharmaceuticals in USA and respondent no.1, Gauri Anil Indulkar is his wife. Respondent no.2 came in contact with the applicant and he represented to the applicant and respondent no.3 that there was a good prospect of business for water and amusement park in India and that if the applicant and respondent no.3 invested in India, the applicant and respondent no.3 would get good returns on their investments. Consequently, the applicant and respondent no.3 remitted $6,40,000 (US Dollars) to respondent nos.1 and 2. A memorandum of understanding dated 7.6.2000 was entered into between the applicant and respondent no.3 on the one hand and respondent nos.1 and 2 on the other. On the basis of the capital so provided by the applicant and respondent no.3, respondent nos.1 and 2 formed a company called, M/s Splash Mountain Water Park Pvt. Ltd. with its registered office at Pune, Maharashtra. According to the applicant, it was agreed that 1,67,000 equity shares of Rs.100/- each in the said company shall be allotted as fully paid-up shares to the applicant and respondent no.3 by way of 40% equity shares to be allotted to the applicant as per the earlier understanding. It was also agreed that respondent nos.2 and 3 shall hold the remaining 2,50,400 equity shares of Rs.100/- each representing their 60% shares holdings in the company.

5. According to the applicant, it was agreed by an agreement dated 29.1.2005 that respondent no.1 who owned 25 acres of land in Pune should transfer 10 acres out of the said land along the eastern boarder thereof to the applicant in lieu of the 40% contribution made by the applicant towards the initial capital. There is a clause of arbitration in the said agreement. In the supplementary agreement entered on 2.2.2005 a small modification was made that inasmuch as respondent no.1 undertook to transfer and convey the entire 25 acres of land owned by her to the applicant instead of the earlier agreed extent of 10 acres of land. Accordingly, respondent no.1 did not transfer the land, as agreed. It is alleged that respondent nos.1 and 2 called a Board meeting of the company hurriedly to ensure that the applicant and respondent no.3 could not know about the meeting and there was no possibility of their participation in the said meeting. In the said meeting, respondent nos.1 and 2 maneuvered to get a resolution passed to wind up the Water Park business of the company and transferred the said business to another company owned by the close relatives of respondent nos.1 and 2. The land on which the business of the company was being run was also handed over to the said company owned by the close relatives of respondent nos.1 and 2.

6. In these circumstances, the applicant had sent a legal notice on 14.3.2006 to respondent nos.1 and 2 appointing one Vilol Khaladkar as an arbitrator and also called upon respondent nos.1 and 2 to appoint their arbitrator. Since respondent nos.1 and 2 did not take any steps to appoint their arbitrator, the applicant filed an arbitration petition in the High Court of Bombay under section 11 of the Act. The applicant submitted that the said arbitration petition filed by the applicant in the High Court of Bombay was not maintainable for the reason that the agreement dated 29.1.2005 and the supplementary agreement dated 2.2.2005 are in the nature of international commercial arbitration agreement as defined under the Act and, therefore, an application for appointment of an arbitrator under section 11(5) read with section 11(9) and section 11(12) of the Act would only lie before the Chief Justice of India.

7. Accordingly, the applicant withdrew the application filed at the Bombay High Court. The applicant submits that the following disputes have arisen between applicant and respondent nos.1 and 2 and the same are required to be referred to an Arbitrator and the Arbitrator is to be appointed for the purpose of adjudicating and deciding the following disputes:

"a) Transfer & conveyance of 25 acres of land, as mentioned in agreement dated 29.1.2005 and dated 2.2.2005, standing in the name of Guari Indulkar to the claimant Ms. Vanna Claire Kaura and her husband Dr. Vinod Kaura.

b) Being shareholders of 1,67,000 number of equity shares of Rs.100/- each of Splash Water Mountain Park Pvt. Ltd. in the name of Vanna Clair Kaura and same number of equity shares of Rs.100/- each in the name of Dr. Vinod Kaura in terms of agreement dated 29.1.2005, action of Gauri Indulkar and Anil Indulkar to hand over the leased land to Lessor was illegal and consequently due to illegal closure of business of Splash Water Park Mountain Pvt. Ltd. they are liable to compensate Vanna Clair Kaura for loss of business and loss of profits approximately to the tune of Rs.20,00,000/- (Rupees twenty lacs) per month from September 2005, the date of Resolution passed in the absence of Vanna Clair Kaura and Dr. Vinod Kaura and without giving them sufficient time to respond and thereby illegally closing the business of Splash Water Park Mountain Pvt. Ltd.

c) A sum of Rs.7,00,000/- per month to be paid to Vanna Clair Kaura by Gauri Indulkar and Anil Indulkar in terms of compensation as stipulated in clause 5 of supplementary agreement dated 2.2.2005 from the date of repayment of loans and payment of lease rent;

d) A sum of Rs.10,00,000/- towards reimbursement of expenditure incurred on travel and board, lodging etc., by the Vanna Clair Kaura;

e) Vanna Clair Kaura to be compensated by way of payment of damages by Gauri Indulkar and Anil Indulkar due to non-performance of their respective parts as stipulated in the agreements dated 29.1.2005 and 2.2.2005;

f) Present, pendent lite and future interest @ 24% on the amounts found due and payable to Vanna Clair Kaura."

8. The applicant prays that an independent arbitrator be appointed for adjudicating and deciding the disputes having arisen between the parties out of the agreement dated 29.1.2005 and the supplementary agreement dated 2.2.2005 entered into for and between the parties.

9. In pursuance to the notice issued by this court, reply on affidavit has been filed on behalf of respondent nos.1 and 2. In the reply affidavit, a number of preliminary objections have been taken. Respondent no.1 submitted that the application filed by the applicant is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed because there is no live dispute pending between the parties. It is also submitted by respondent no.1 that the applicant has suppressed facts from this court and has been indulging in forum shopping and the present application is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone.

10. It is further mentioned in the reply that the applicant has abandoned the arbitration clause. It is further mentioned that the MOU dated 7.6.2000 and subsequent agreement dated 29.1.2005 and the supplementary agreement dated 2.2.2005 were entered into by respondent nos.1 and 2 due to coercion, threat and harassment on the part of the applicant and respondent no.3.

11. The company by the name, Splash Mountain Water Park Pvt. Ltd. came into existence on or about 3.7.1997. By Board Resolution dated 24.6.2005, wherein the applicant herself was present, the applicant proposed the closure of the Water Park business of the company since the same was suffering losses. She further stated that she and respondent no.3 would not invest any further funds to keep the business going. As such, by way of board resolution dated 24.6.2005, the proposal of the applicant was discussed and thereafter it was unanimously resolved that the activity of the Water Park should be closed as of 30th June, 2005.

12. In the reply, respondent no.1 has mentioned that the applicant is indulging in forum shopping and has filed multi- pronged litigation before various forums including the Bombay High Court, Civil Judge, Pune, Principal Bench of Company Law Board and this court as well as the criminal proceedings before the Judicial Magistrate, First Class.

13. It is also mentioned that the applicant has invoked arbitration by notice dated 14.3.2006 and the present application is not based on the said invocation and the applicant subsequently entered into arbitration on second time on the same cause of action and as such the present application is barred. It is also submitted that the applicant having invoked arbitration by notice dated 14.3.2006 and thereafter abandoning the same cannot seek arbitration for the second time for the same cause of action. Respondent no.1 also submitted that the present application is a clear abuse of the process of law and is liable to be dismissed.

14. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and carefully perused the MOU dated 7.6.2000 and agreement dated 29.1.2005 and the supplementary agreement dated 2.2.2005.

15. In my considered view, the dispute has arisen between the parties and it needs to be adjudicated and decided by an Arbitrator. Consequently, I request Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.N. Variava, a former Judge of this court to accept this Arbitration and adjudicate and decide the dispute which has arisen between the parties. The learned Arbitrator would be free to decide about his fee.

16. This arbitration petition is accordingly disposed of with the direction to the parties to appear before Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.N. Variava, a former Judge of this court at 11 a.m. on 27th July, 2009 at Mumbai.

17. The Registry is directed to immediately communicate this order to the learned arbitrator to enable him to decide the arbitration matter as expeditiously as practicable.

18. Consequently, this arbitration petition is allowed and disposed of. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, I direct the parties to bear their own costs.

**********
HEADNOTE

CONTRACTS / CONSTITUTION
Contractual disputes - Settlement of - Writ -If maintainable - Disputes between Central Government entity and State entity - How to be resolved - Appellant, a Central Government entity, obtaining from the respondent, a State entity, certain land on lease - Upon the failure of the latter to execute the agreement, appellant filing a writ - High Court holding that since the disputes related to contractual matters, writ was not maintainable - Validity. Held all such disputes should be resolved by Committees to be constituted by the Central Government. Directions given for constituting a committee comprising of Union Cabinet Secretary, Chief Secretary of the State, Secretaries of the Concerned Departments of the Union and the State and CEOs of the concerned undertakings, forthwith and resolve the disputes between the appellant and respondent within four months.
HELD
In the instant case, CIDCO is a State entity and the appellant is a central entity. The desirability of having a committee to sort out differences between pubic sector undertakings, State Governments, different Govt. departments have been highlighted by this Court in several cases. (Para 7)

The matter is pending since 1990. Considering the nature of the controversy which is a recurring feature we direct that a committee be formed to sort out the differences between the Central Government and the State Government entities. The composition of such committee shall be as follows:

(1)The Cabinet Secretary of the Union;

(2)Chief Secretary of the State;

(3)Secretaries of the concerned departments of Union and the State; and

(4)Chief Executive Officers of the concerned undertakings. (Para 10)

As the matter is pending since long, we direct that the Committee shall be constituted forthwith to take a decision within 4 months from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment. (Para 11)

CASES REFERRED
1.M/s Popcorn Entertainment & Anr. v. City Industrial Development Corpn. & Anr. [JT 2007 (4) SC 70] (Para 5)

2.Punjab and Sind Bank v. Allahabad Bank and Ors. [2006 (4) SCC 780] (Para 8)

3.U.P. SEB and Anr. v. Sant Kabir Sahakari Katai Mills Ltd. [JT 2005 (8) SC 399] (Para 9)

4.Rajureshwar Associates v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2004 (5) SC 249] (Para 5)

5.Chief Conservator of Forests, Govt. of A.P. v. Collector and Ors. [JT 2003 (5) SC 210] (Para 7)

6.National Highways Authority of India v. Ganga Enterprises and Anr. [JT 2003 (Supp-1) SC 300] (Para 5)

7.Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai and Ors. [JT 1998 (7) SC 243] (Para 5)

8.Oil and Natural Gas Commission and Anr. v. Collector of Central Excise [JT 1992 (4) SC 158] (Para 6)

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1. Leave granted.

2. Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court dismissing the Civil Writ Petition No.4036 of 2001 with Civil Application No.1583 of 2004. It was held that with reference to several judgments of this Court the writ jurisdiction should not be exercised in contractual matters. It was also held that there was no reason whatsoever for which a Government of India undertaking shall bypass the alternative remedy of a civil suit.

3. Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:

3.1 A writ petition was filed by the appellant alleging inaction on the part of the City & Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'CIDCO') in not executing the agreement of lease with the appellant- company. Prayer in the writ petition was for a direction by issuance of an appropriate writ requiring the CIDCO to execute the agreement in respect of the possession of plots covered by the agreements. Prayer essentially was (i) to hand over the possession of plot of land admeasuring 24 hectares demarcated in favour of the appellant situated at Bhandkhal (Navghar), Taluka Uran alongwith approach road and water supply till the boundary of the said plot of land; (ii) execute a lease agreement for the period set out more particularly in the letter of allotment dated 5th March, 1984 in respect of the said plot of land; (iii) issue appropriate writ in respect of demand for service charge contained in the letter dated 24th July, 1990 and (iv) other reliefs.

4. The High Court referred to several correspondence exchanged between the parties but ultimately held that the issues related to contractual matters and the writ petition was not the appropriate remedy. Findings were also recorded regarding maintainability of the writ petition.

5. In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the High Court has lost sight of the fact that the dispute involved two public bodies. It was highlighted by learned counsel for the appellant that this Court in M/s Popcorn Entertainment & Anr. v. City Industrial Development Corpn. & Anr.1 held in para 15 about the maintainability of the writ petition. In paragraph 42 of the judgment it was noted that there was no dispute and in fact there was concession regarding maintainability of the writ petition. Reference has also been made to National Highways Authority of India v. Ganga Enterprises and Anr.2 and Rajureshwar Associates v. State of Maharashtra3 to contend that in all contractual matters a writ application can be entertained. The three circumstances wherein relating to contractual matters writ applications can be entertained were set out in Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai and Ors.4 .

6. Mr. Altaf Ahmad, learned senior counsel on the other hand submitted that in a dispute of this nature, the course indicated by this Court in Oil and Natural Gas Commission and Anr. v. Collector of Central Excise5 can be applied.

7. In the instant case, CIDCO is a State entity and the appellant is a central entity. The desirability of having a committee to sort out differences between pubic sector undertakings, State Governments, different Govt. departments have been highlighted by this Court in several cases. In Chief Conservator of Forests, Govt. of A.P. v. Collector and Ors.6 it was inter alia as follows :

"14. Under the scheme of the Constitution, Article 131 confers original jurisdiction on the Supreme Court in regard to a dispute between two States of the Union of India or between one or more States and the Union of India. It was not contemplated by the framers of the Constitution or CPC that two departments of a State or the Union of India will fight a litigation in a court of law. It is neither appropriate nor permissible for two departments of a State or the Union of India to fight litigation in a court of law. Indeed, such a course cannot but be detrimental to the public interest as it also entails avoidable wastage of public money and time. Various departments of the Government are its limbs and, therefore, they must act in coordination and not in confrontation. Filing of a writ petition by one department against the other by invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court is not only against the propriety and polity as it smacks of indiscipline but is also contrary to the basic concept of law which requires that for suing or being sued, there must be either a natural or a juristic person. The States/Union of India must evolve a mechanism to set at rest all interdepartmental controversies at the level of the Government and such matters should not be carried to a court of law for resolution of the controversy. In the case of disputes between public sector undertakings and the Union of India, this Court in Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. CCE, [1992 Supp (2) SCC 432] called upon the Cabinet Secretary to handle such matters. In Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. CCE (JT 1995 Supp (4) SCC 541) this Court directed the Central Government to set up a committee consisting of representatives from the Ministry of Industry, the Bureau of Public Enterprises and the Ministry of Law, to monitor disputes between Ministry and Ministry of the Government of India, Ministry and public sector undertakings of the Government of India and public sector undertakings in between themselves, to ensure that no litigation comes to court or to a tribunal without the matter having been first examined by the Committee and its clearance for litigation. The Government may include a representative of the Ministry concerned in a specific case and one from the Ministry of Finance in the Committee. Senior officers only should be nominated so that the Committee would function with status, control and discipline.

15. The facts of this appeal, noticed above, make out a strong case that there is a felt need of setting up of similar committees by the State Government also to resolve the controversy arising between various departments of the State or the State and any of its undertakings. It would be appropriate for the State Governments to set up a committee consisting of the Chief Secretary of the State, the Secretaries of the departments concerned, the Secretary of Law and where financial commitments are involved, the Secretary of Finance. The decision taken by such a committee shall be binding on all the departments concerned and shall be the stand of the Government."

8. In Punjab and Sind Bank v. Allahabad Bank and Ors.1 it was observed as follows:

"6. The matter was again examined in the case of Chief Conservator of Forest v. Collector [JT 2003 (5) SC 210). In Para 14 and 15 it was noted as follows:

"Under the scheme of the Constitution, Article 131 confers original jurisdiction on the Supreme Court in regard to a dispute between two States of the Union of India or between one or more States and the Union of India. It was not contemplated by the framers of the Constitution or the C.P.C. that two departments of a State or the Union of India will fight a litigation in a court of law. It is neither appropriate nor permissible for two departments of a State or the Union of India to fight litigation in a court of law. Indeed, such a course cannot but be detrimental to the public interest as it also entails avoidable wastage of public money and time. Various departments of the Government are its limbs and, therefore, they must act in co- ordination and not in confrontation. Filing of a writ petition by one department against the other by invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court is not only against the propriety and polity as it smacks of indiscipline but is also contrary to the basic concept of law which requires that for suing or being sued, there must be either a natural or a juristic person. The States/Union of India must evolve a mechanism to set at rest all inter- departmental controversies at the level of the Government and such matters should not be carried to a court of law for resolution of the controversy. In the case of disputes between public sector undertakings and Union of India, this Court in Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. Collector of Central Excise (supra) called upon the Cabinet Secretary to handle such matters. In Oil and Natural Gas Commission & Anr. v. Collector of Central Excise (1995 Suppl. (4) SCC 541), this Court directed the Central Government to set up a Committee consisting of representatives from the Ministry of Industry, the Bureau of Public Enterprises and the Ministry of Law, to monitor dispute between Ministry and Ministry of the Government of India, Ministry and public sector undertakings of the Government of India and public sector undertakings in between themselves, to ensure that no litigation comes to court or to a Tribunal without the matter having been first examined by the Committee and its clearance for litigation. The Government may include a representative of the Ministry concerned in a specific case and one from the Ministry of Finance in the Committee. Senior officers only should be nominated so that the Committee would function with status, control and discipline.

The facts of this appeal, noticed above, make out a strong case that there is felt need of setting up of similar committees by the State Government also to resolve the controversy arising between various departments of the State or the State and any of its undertakings. It would be appropriate for the State Governments to set up a Committee consisting of the Chief Secretary of the State, the Secretaries of the concerned departments, the Secretary of Law and where financial commitments are involved, the Secretary of Finance. The decision taken by such a committee shall be binding on all the departments concerned and shall be the stand of the Government. "

7. The directions as noted above were quoted in Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. v. Chairman, Central Board, Direct Taxes and another1 and were adopted in paragraph 8. It was noted as follows:

"Undoubtedly, the right to enforce a right in a court of law cannot be effaced. However, it must be remembered that courts are overburdened with a large number of cases. The majority of such cases pertain to Government Departments and/or public sector undertakings. As is stated in Chief Conservator of Forests' case (supra) it was not contemplated by the framers of the Constitution or the Civil Procedure Code that two departments of a State or Union of India and/or a department of the Government and a public sector undertaking fight a litigation in a court of law. Such a course is detrimental to public interest as it entails avoidable wastage of public money and time. These are all limbs of the Government and must act in co-ordination and not confrontation. The mechanism set up by this court is not, as suggested by Mr. Andhyarujina, only to conciliate between Government Departments. It is also set up for purposes of ensuring that frivolous disputes do not come before courts without clearance from the High Powered Committee. If it can, the High Powered Committee will resolve the dispute. If the dispute is not resolved the Committee would undoubtedly give clearance. However, there could also be frivolous litigation proposed by a department of the Government or a public sector undertaking. This could be prevented by the High Powered Committee. In such cases there is no question of resolving the dispute. The Committee only has to refuse permission to litigate. No right of the Department/public sector undertaking is affected in such a case. The litigation being of a frivolous nature must not be brought to court. To be remembered that in almost all cases one or the other party will not be happy with the decision of the High Powered Committee. The dissatisfied party will always claim that its rights are affected, when in fact, no right is affected. The Committee is constituted of highly placed officers of the Government, who do not have an interest in the dispute, it is thus expected that their decision will be fair and honest. Even if the Department/public sector undertaking finds the decision unpalatable, discipline requires that they abide by it. Otherwise the whole purpose of this exercise will be lost and every party against whom the decision is given will claim that they have been wronged and that their rights are affected. This should not be allowed to be done."

8. The ONGC I to III cases (supra), Chief Conservator's case (supra) and Mahanagar Telephone's case (supra) deal with disputes relating to Central Government, State Government and Public Sector Undertakings. They have no application to the facts of these cases as the High Court has not indicated any reason for its abrupt conclusion that the writ petitioners are Public Sector Undertakings. In the absence of a factual determination in that regard, the decisions can have no application."

9. The position has also been examined in U.P. SEB and Anr. v. Sant Kabir Sahakari Katai Mills Ltd.1 and Mahanagar Telephone Nigam's case (supra).

10. The matter is pending since 1990. Considering the nature of the controversy which is a recurring feature we direct that a committee be formed to sort out the differences between the Central Government and the State Government entities. The composition of such committee shall be as follows:

(1)The Cabinet Secretary of the Union;

(2)Chief Secretary of the State;

(3)Secretaries of the concerned departments of Union and the State; and

(4)Chief Executive Officers of the concerned undertakings.

11. As the matter is pending since long, we direct that the Committee shall be constituted forthwith to take a decision within 4 months from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.

12. The appeal is disposed of with no order as to costs.

**********
HEADNOTE
ARBITRATION
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
Section 34(2)(iv) , 31(7)(a) and 16. Award - Reference during pendency of SLP - Relief sought relating to compensation for destruction of houses , crops , garden , and to reclamation of lands etc. - Reference mentioning , " The disputes and differences arising between parties in SLP " - Arbitrators , however , awarding compensation for loss of potential of lands . Held that the same fell out side the scope of reference . Award set-aside and matter directed to be decided in SLP
HELD
The first question , therefore , is : What were the terms of the submission to arbitration . The order of reference to arbitration is material in the context ; it refers to the arbitration agreement that the parties had filed . Clause 1 thereof refers to arbitration " the disputes and differences arising between the parties hereto in S.L.P. ( Civil ) No. 17106 of 1996 . The S.L.P. arose out of the writ petition filed by the appellants ( and others ) in the High Court . It is , therefore , reasonable to conclude that what was referred to arbitration was the dispute in the writ petition . This is , in fact , not contested . [ Para 12 ]

The reliefs the writ petition sought , were :a) a direction to the second respondent to close its plant ; b) damages from the second respondent in the sum of Rupees 1 crore for the destruction of (i) residential houses , (ii) crops and (iii) mango garden ; c) a direction to the second respondent to reclaim the writ petitioners ' agricultural lands that had been rendered unfit for cultivation ; and d)a direction to the first and third respondent to take civil and criminal action against the second respondent . This , then , was what was referred to arbitration . There was no claim for damages for the alleged loss of the potential of the lands and no averments or particulars in that behalf . [ Para 13 ]

The second respondent had contended in its reply to the appellants ' statement of claim that the claim therein fell outside the scope of the reference . It is difficult to see how , in the circumstances , the second respondent can be said to have acquiesced in the determination of damages for the alleged loss of potential of the appellants ' land . The point must be read in the light of restricted claim and not as encompassing the claim for compensation for the alleged lost potential of the land . [ Para 14 ]

It was not the case of the appellants in the writ petition , even in the alternative , that the land could not be reclaimed and there was no claim for compensation for the alleged lost potential of the land or averments or particulars in support thereof . The relief that was sought was a direction to the second respondent to reclaim the appellants ' land ; awarding compensation for the alleged lost potential of the land was not moulding the relief that was sought . [ Para 16 ]

We hold that the award of Rs. 77,19,800 /- for " loss of potential of land " and interest thereon falls outside the scope of the reference to arbitration and is not in relation to a dispute contemplated thereby . [ Para 17 ]

CASES REFERRED
1. State of Orissa v. B.N. Agarwalla [JT 1997 (2) SC 51] Referred in [JT 1998 (7) SC 128] (Para 9) 

ORDER


1. The appellants and others filed a writ petition in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana against the respondents . The case in the writ petition , briefly stated , was that the writ petitioners were owners of agricultural lands , residential buildings , tubewells etc. at Gaddiwara within the municipal limits of Panipat . The second respondent , the National Fertilizers Limited , had installed a plant for the manufacture of fertilisers in the vicinity . The second respondent had constructed a ' kucha ' bund around the original pond and was using it for depositing effluents . The bund was made of earth which breached due to the excessive pressure of the effluents and the accumulation of burnt ash . The result was that water and ash had escaped from the pond and had damaged the writ petitioners ' standing crops , mango gardens and residential properties . There had been a loss of soil , from 6 inches to 2 feet , on their lands which had made them unfit for cultivation until such time as they were reclaimed . The second respondent had not done anything to redress the grievances of the writ petitioners . The writ petition , therefore , prayed for a direction to the second respondents to close its plant until effluent disposal arrangements were made and " to pay the damages of Rs. one crore for the destruction of residential houses , crops and Mango Garden . The respondent No. 2 may also be directed to reclaim the agricultural land of the petitioners which has been rendered unfit for cultivation . The respondents No. 1 and 3 may be directed to take steps for civil and criminal ( action ) against the respondent No. 2 "

2. The writ petition was dismissed by a learned single Judge because it raised disputed questions of fact which could not be resolved in proceedings under Article 226. The order of the learned single Judge was upheld by a Division Bench , the appeal being summarily dismissed .

3. The appellants ( being five of the writ petitioners ) filed a petition for special leave to appeal against the order of the Division Bench . Notice thereon was issued to the respondents .

4. Learned counsel appearing for the parties informed this Court on 15th July , 1997 that they had agreed to go to arbitration to settle their disputes and an adjournment was granted for one week to file the arbitration agreement . On 21st July , 1997 the following order was passed :

" Pursuant to our order dated 15.7.1997 , the contestants have filed an Arbitration Agreement whereby they have referred their disputes to the two named Arbitrators therein . Therefore , we grant leave and keep the matter pending till the arrival of the arbitration award . Let the Arbitrators be informed so that they enter upon the reference. "

The arbitration agreement stated , in clause 1 , thus :

" That the disputes and differences arising between the parties hereto in S.L.P ( Civil ) No. 17106 of 1996 shall stand referred to the arbitration of Mr. Justice K.S. Tiwana and Mr. Justice G.R. Majithia , the retired Judges of the Hon 'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court at Chandigarh , who shall resolve and decide the aforesaid disputes between the parties . "

The agreement required the two learned arbitrators to appoint an umpire before entering upon the reference and provided for the modalities thereof . Pursuant thereto , Mr. S.S. Dewan , a retired Chief Justice , was appointed the umpire . On 20th September , 1997 the learned arbitrators , sitting with the learned umpire , entered upon the reference .

5. The appellants filed a statement of claim dated 27th September , 1997 before the learned arbitrators . They contended that effluents such as fly ash emitted by the second respondent 's plant and slurry converged to the appellants ' land because of successive breaches of the bund and pond had caused havoc to the agricultural land , agricultural crops , mango orchards and fishery ponds and had destroyed the appellant 's land . Details were stated . The estimated value of profits lost by the appellants were set out , aggregating to Rs. 4.2 lakhs for the years 1984 , 1986 , 1987 , 1988 , 1990 and 1991 . The appellants submitted that by August , 1991 their land had become completely unfit for cultivation because of chemical pollutants which had seeped therein and fly ash had been deposited over the trees , etc .

" The value of the land thus totally diminished in so far as the land was completely destroyed . . . . . . The land being completely destroyed and having become worthless both for commercial and non-commercial use , the party no. 1 is claiming the entire value of the land estimated at (Rs.) 2 crores and 40 lakhs as damage of property being total loss in the year 1991 . " The appellants claimed interest " on the sum of entire loss or damages incurred ever since 1984 at the rate of 18% upto August 1991 " and " interest at the rate of 18% per annum till the date of re-payment of the entire amount " . The appellants quantified their claim at Rs. 5 crores 28 lakhs , including Rs. 2 crores 40 lakhs for " total loss suffered on account of the destruction of land making it worthless both for agricultural use ever since the year 1991 " .

6. The respondents filed a written statement in which they drew attention to the order of reference passed by this court on 21st July , 1997 and the arbitration agreement and submitted that the claim made in the statement of claim went beyond the scope of the writ petition and , therefore , beyond the scope of the arbitration .

7. On 2nd January , 1998 the learned umpire and arbitrators made an award . The relief given to the appellants read thus :

" In the result , we determine the compensation as under :-

(i)For loss of potential of land                          Rs. 77,19,800.00

(ii)For damage to the crops other                     Rs. 5,14,347.50
than orchard for the years , 1984 ,
1986 , 1987 , 1988 , 1990 and 1991 .
---------
Total :                                                            Rs. 82,34,147.00
--------

The demised land lost all productivity and fertility from the year 1991 . Accordingly , we allow interest on the principal amount @ 12% per annum from January I , 1991 till the date of award and interest @ 18% per annum from the date of award till realisation . Party No . 1 will be entitled to the costs of the arbitration proceedings . "

8. On 31st January, 1998 the appellants made an application to this court to take the award on record and dispose of the appeal in terms thereof. The second respondent, on 30th March, 1998, filed objections to making the award a rule of the court. This is the scope of the controversy before us.

9. The learned Attorney General , appearing for the second respondent , submitted that the award fell outside the ambit of the reference to arbitration made by this Court . It also went far beyond the terms of the arbitration agreement . This was because it awarded to the appellants compensation for loss of potential of the land , in the sum of Rs. 77,19,800/-. The learned Attorney General submitted that the case was covered by the terms of Section 34(2)(iv) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act , 1996 ( " the Act " ) . Next , the learned Attorney General pointed out that the award made copious references to an inspection report made by the learned arbitrators consequent upon a site visit . He submitted that in as much as a copy of the inspection report had not been made available by the learned arbitrators to the second respondent , the second respondent had been unable to present its case thereon and the principles of natural justice had been violated . In this behalf the learned Attorney General drew our attention to Section34(2)(iii) of the Act . The learned Attorney General submitted , lastly , that the award of interest was without jurisdiction because there was no claim for interest . In any event , he submitted , the grant of pre-reference interest at the rate of 12% per annum was without jurisdiction , and the amount of such interest aggregated to Rs. 66,45,557.96 . In support of his contention on the aspect of interest , the learned Attorney General relied upon the judgment of this Court in State of Orissa v. B.N. Agarwalla , JT 1997 (2) SC 51 , and the provisions of Section 3(1)(b) of the Interest Act , 1978.

10. Mr. D.D. Thakur , learned counsel for the appellants , drew our attention to the prayers in the writ petition and to an application made before the High Court pending the writ petition . It alleged that the writ petitioners had been deprived of their livelihood , which was dependent on the soil ; the writ petitioners ' lands had been rendered unfit for cultivation and their houses had suffered great loss on account of floods ; the environment of the area had been rendered unfit due to pollution and the residents were living in great stress and strain , which had caused depression , on account of the constant fear of leakage of gas . Learned counsel drew attention to the arbitration agreement . He submitted that the learned arbitrators and umpire found that the appellants ' land could not be reclaimed ; they , therefore ,gave the alternate relief of compensation for the land . He submitted that arbitrators had in this behalf the same powers as a court of law to mould the relief having regard to the circumstances . It was , learned counsel submitted , a reasonable conclusion from what was stated in paragraph 10 of the award that the learned arbitrators had found that the appellants ' land could not be reclaimed . Paragraph 10 of the award reads thus :

" 10 . Party No.2 contended that if the Party No.1 had drained out the water , the land could be reclaimed and made fit for cultivation . This assertion fails to absolve Party No. 2 of its responsibility to maintain its ash pond and the dykes in a proper manner to avoid the breach or leakage therein . The negligence of party No.2 is apparent . Their failure to keep the ash ponds and the dykes in a standardised form and to prevent any leakage or breach is blame-worthy of negligence . Their negligence has resulted in rendering the land of Party No . I beyond cultivation and the garden developed thereof deprecated in result . During our inspection , we noted that on a part of the disputed land residential houses belonging to people belonging to lower strata of society , seemingly below poverty line , have been constructed recently and that locality is quite filthy . Foul smell unabatedly emanated from the land , although the ash ponds were abandoned and as alleged by party No. 2 were to be used in the event of emergency only . "

Reference was also made by learned counsel to the findings in paragraph 13 of the award that the appellants ' land had " had the potentiality for developing a housing colony thereon . In fact , a licence was granted by the Haryana Town and Country Planning Department . The second party No.2 contended that the land for which the licence was granted was not owned by Party No.1 Nevertheless it could not be disputed that the land for which permission was granted was part and parcel of the disputed land and similarly situated in all respects . The irresistible inference is that the demised land could be developed into a housing colony . During our inspection we noticed that the land is hardly 3 Kms. away from the G.T.Road passing through Panipat . G.T. Road is also called Sher Shah Suri Marg and it is agreed over from Calcutta to Rawalpindi ( now forming part of Pakistan ) . C.W.I Shri Vineet Khanna says that the Housing Colony could not be developed because of the fear of the deluge with ash slurry water on the demised land . Thus , the land other than the land under orchard was at one time the most fertile land yielding considerable annual income as depicted in the average produce statement , Exhibit TW1/1. The land under the orchard measuring 17 acres similarly fetched considerable income to Party No. 1 , as stated by Shri Vineet Khanna . Now this land is unfit for cultivation . However , as was noticed and observed by us in our inspection note , many residential houses belonging to people of lower strata of society . seemingly blow poverty line , have been constructed on a part of the disputed land in the recent years . After the agriculture and horticulture activity stopped , part of the land other than the land under the orchard before 1991 was sold at the rate of Rs. 200/- per sq. yard . . . . . . . . " . In paragraph 15 of the award , to which reference was made , the learned arbitrators were unable to agree with " the amount of compensation claimed by the claimants , as admittedly the market value of their land in recent years was not higher than Rs.200/- per square yard as the use of the land , for the reasons aforesaid , is confined to job of trivial nature or at best its use is limited for residential purpose of the lower strata of the society . The potential of the land considerably diminished . In the circumstances , the claimants would be entitled only to the quantum of compensation for loss of average potential of the land . Keeping in view the totality of circumstances and the material brought on record , we hold that the ends of justice entail fixation of the quantum of compensation for loss of potential of land at Rs. 55/- per square yard . In summation , as the average potential value of the land is taken out at Rs. 55/- per sq. yard and the total area of the damaged land being 140360 per sq. yards , therefore , total loss under this head comes to Rs. 77,19,800/- " . In learned counsel 's submission , this , in the circumstances , was a reasonable conclusion for the learned arbitrators to come to . Learned counsel also submitted that the second respondent had acquiesced in the course that the arbitration proceedings had taken and he referred in this behalf to the points for decision which the learned arbitrators had framed , namely , " (1) Whether Party No . 1 has suffered any damages , if so , is entitled to any compensation ? (2) Whether the claim is barred by acquiescence , laches , estoppel , limitation and res judicata ? " In this context , Mr. Thakur referred to Section 16 of the Act which empowers the arbitral tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction . In regard to the inspection reports , learned counsel submitted that the learned arbitrators were under no obligation to furnish the same to the parties to the arbitration and , in fact , the appellants had also not received a copy there of . He submitted that the second respondent had not stated that any part of the inspection report was incorrect . In the matter of interest , learned counsel referred to the provisions of Section 31 (7)(a) of the Act. Section 31 deals with the form and contents of an arbitral award and sub-section 7 , (a) states :

" Unless otherwise agreed by the parties , where and in so far as an arbitral award is for the payment of money , the arbitral tribunal may include in the sum for which the award is made interest , at such rate as it deems reasonable , on the whole or any part of the money , for the whole or any part of the period between the date on which the cause of action arose and the date on which the award is made . "

11. Section 34(1) of the Act states that recourse to a court against an arbitral award may be made only by an application for setting aside such award in accordance with sub-sections (2) and (3) . Under sub-section (2) , Clause (iv) an award may be set aside if it " deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration , or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration " . The proviso the clause (iv) says that if the decision on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not so submitted , only that part of the award which contains decisions on matters not submitted to arbitration may be set aside .

12. The first question , therefore , is : What were the terms of the submission to arbitration . The order of reference to arbitration is material in the context ; it refers to the arbitration agreement that the parties had filed . Clause 1 thereof refers to arbitration " the disputes and differences arising between the parties hereto in S.L.P. ( Civil ) No. 17106 of 1996. The S.L.P. arose out of the writ petition filed by the appellants ( and others ) in the High Court . It is , therefore , reasonable to conclude that what was referred to arbitration was the dispute in the writ petition . This is , in fact , not contested .

13. The grievance in the writ petition was that the overflow of effluents and slurry from a pond in the second respondent 's premises due to breaches of the earthen bund thereof had damaged the writ petitioners ' lands , crops , mango crops , houses , etc. The reliefs the writ petition sought , and this is most important were :a) a direction to the second respondent to close its plant ; b) damages from the second respondent in the sum of Rupees 1 crore for the destruction of (i) residential houses , (ii) crops and (iii) mango garden ; c) a direction to the second respondent to reclaim the writ petitioners ' agricultural lands that had been rendered unfit for cultivation ; and d)a direction to the first and third respondent to take civil and criminal action against the second respondent . This , then , was what was referred to arbitration . There was no claim for damages for the alleged loss of the potential of the lands and no averments or particulars in that behalf .

14. There is no discussion or ruling in the award relating to the scope of the reference ; this despite the fact that the second respondent had contended in its reply to the appellants ' statement of claim that the claim therein fell outside the scope of the reference . It is difficult to see how , in the circumstances , the second respondent can be said to have acquiesced in the determination of damages for the alleged loss of potential of the appellants ' land . All that was referred to by learned counsel for the appellants in this behalf was the statement in the award of the points for determination . That the first of the points relates to compensation for damage suffered by the appellants does not by itself support learned counsel 's submission for compensation for damage to the appellants ' residential houses , crops and mango garden was within the scope of the reference . The first point must be read in the light of this restricted claim and not as encompassing the claim for compensation for the alleged lost potential of the land .

15. The argument of learned counsel for the appellants was that the learned arbitrators had found that the appellants ' land was beyond reclamation and , therefore , the learned arbitrators had moulded the relief and awarded compensation for the land 's lost potential . We do not find in the paragraphs of the award quoted by learned counsel , or , for that matter , anywhere else in the award , a discussion or conclusion by the learned arbitrators that the appellants ' land could not be reclaimed . in fact , the award quotes a witness as explaining ' reclamation ' thus : " By this I mean bringing the soil to its natural position . The natural position of the soil can be had after the total removal of the coal ash " . A perusal of the award suggests that the learned arbitrators did not think that they could award compensation for the alleged lost potential of the land only if they found that the land could not be reclaimed ; there is , therefore , no such evidence or discussion or finding in the award .

16. In any event , we do not find it possible to accept learned counsel 's submission that granting compensation for the alleged lost potential of the land was permissible moulding of the relief . It was not the case of the appellants in the writ petition , even in the alternative , that the land could not be reclaimed and there was no claim for compensation for the alleged lost potential of the land or averments or particulars in support thereof . The relief that was sought was a direction to the second respondent to reclaim the appellants ' land ; awarding compensation for the alleged lost potential of the land was not moulding the relief that was sought .

17. We hold that the award of Rs. 77,19,800 /- for " loss of potential of land " and interest thereon falls outside the scope of the reference to arbitration and is not in relation to a dispute contemplated thereby .

18. The learned Attorney General did not advance an argument specific to the award of Rs. 5,14,347.5 for " damage to crops other than orchard for the years 1984 , 1986 , 1987 , 1988 , 1990 and 1991 " . Even his general argument related to the learned arbitrators ' inspection report would not really apply to this item of the award . At the same time , learned counsel for the appellants did not urge that the award should not be set aside qua this item which is easily separable and the appeal should be allowed in terms thereof . We can understand why . The larger claim of the appellants is in relation to the reclamation of the land ; the appellants would want to agitate that claim in the appeal and we think that to do complete justice in the circumstances we should permit them to do so .

19. In the view that we take , it is not necessary to deal with the arguments on the aspects of the inspection report and interest .

20. The award dated 2nd January , 1998 is set aside . The appellants ' application ( I.A.No.2 of 1998 ) to take the award on record and dispose of the appeal in terms thereof is dismissed . The second respondent 's application ( I.A.No.3 of 1998 ) to set aside the award is allowed.

21. The appeal shall now be heard on its merits. It shall be listed in the ordinary course.

22. No orders as to costs.

**********
HEADNOTE
LAND REVENUE
Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887:
Sections 66 and 69 - Recovery of arrears of salary as land revenue - Arrest and detention of defaulter - Whether a defaulter could be arrested without prior notice of arrest? - Whether the provisions of sections 67 and 69 are unfair? - Act does not contemplate issuance of prior notice before warrant of arrest is issued - Procedure lays down the mode in which the recovery could be made - Held that procedure of issuance of prior notice tends to frustrate the effectivity of clause (b) of s.67 and could aid as a lever to avoid process of recovery by arrest and detention - Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, section 33-C(2) - Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 21 - Appeal dismissed.
HELD


O R D E R
1. This appeal by special leave arises from an order dated October 24, 1980 passed by the Division Bench of Delhi High Court.
2. The undisputed facts are that the appellant is a partner of Dr. Sahib Singh and Sons. While doing business in Delhi, the workmen had an adjudication in the Labour Court under s.33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, for recovery of arrears of salary, bonus etc. The Labour Court had certified under s.33-C(1) that a sum of Rs.62,843.50 was due to them and issued a certificate to the District Collector to have it recovered from the partnership firm as arrears of land revenue. It is not disputed before us that on July 8, 1980, the bailiff of the Collector had gone to the appellant and sought to attach his movable properties. He then assured the bailiff that he would appear before the Collector but admittedly he never turned up. On July 20, 1980 the bailiff came with a warrant of arrest against the appellant. Calling the order of arrest in question, a writ petition came to be filed but was dismissed. Thus this appeal by special leave.
3. It is contended by learned counsel for the appellant that the procedure prescribed in ss. 67 and 69 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Punjab Act No.17 of 1987) is unfair, improper and vitiated Articles 21 and 14 of the Constitution. He urged that without prior notice of arrest a defaulter cannot be arrested. Neither Section 67 nor Section 69 prescribes such a procedure. Therefore, it will be unjust, oppressive and arbitrary exercise of power. 
4. We do not find any substance in the contention. Section 67 enumerates various modes in which the arrears of land revenue could be recovered from any person or more in the manner prescribed thereunder. One of the clause, which is clause (b) envisages that recovery could be effected is by arrest and detention of his person. Section 69 provides the procedure in that behalf which reads as follows :
"69. Arrest and detention of defaulter - (1) At any time after an arrear of land-revenue has accrued a Revenue-Officer may issue a warrant directing an officer named therein to arrest the defaulter and bring him before the Revenue Officer.
(2) When the defaulter is brought before the Revenue Officer, the Revenue Officer may cause him to be taken before the Collector, or may keep him under personal restraint for a period not exceeding ten days and then, if the arrear is still unpaid, cause him to be taken before the Collector.
(3) When the defaulter is brought before the Collector, the Collector may issue an order to the officer in charge of the civil jail of the district, directing him to confine the defaulter in the jail for such period and not exceeding one month from the date of the order, as the Collector thinks fit.
(4) The process of arrest and detention shall not be executed against a defaulter who is a female, a minor, a lunatic or an idiot."
5. A reading thereof clearly indicates that when arrears of land revenue has accrued the Revenue Officer may issue warrant directing the officer named therein to arrest the defaulter and bring him before the Revenue Officer, who is empowered to keep the defaulter under personal restraint for a period not exceeding 10 days. Even then, if arrears are not paid, cause him to be taken before the Collector. Sub-section (3) gives power to the Collector to take further action thereon. When the defaulter has been brought before him, the Act envisages that Collector may issue an order to the officer in charge of the civil jail of the district and direct the defaulter to be confined in the jail for a period not exceeding one month from the date of the order, as the Collector thinks fit.
6. It is seen that a procedure has laid down mentioning the mode in which recovery could be effected. The Act does not contemplate issuance of any prior notice before warrant of arrest is issued. When the movable properties were sought to be attached, the appellant himself had undertaken to appear before the Collector but he did not turn up. Rather he avoided the process. Therefore, the question whether prior notice should be given has become redundant. The procedure of issuance of prior notice tends to frustrate the effectivity of clause (b) of s.67 of the Act and could aid as a lever to avoid process of recovery by arrest and detention.
7. The appeal is accordingly dismissed. No costs.
**********
HEADNOTE
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
Land disputes - Suit for declaration of title and possession - Suit against appellant dismissed by first appellate court holding the appellant to be the Sirdar of the land in question - Said decision affirmed by the High Court - Thereafter appellant seeking restitution of the land in question - Said application rejected by the trial court - High Court too dismissing the appeal - Validity. Held suit against the appellant having been dismissed, appellant was entitled to possession of the suit land and therefore the High Court's decision dismissing the appeal against the order dismissing the restitution application was not correct. [Paras 5, 6 and 7]

Civil suits in general - Inordinate delays in the disposal by courts - Concerned authorities requested to do the needful to ensure speedy disposal of cases by the courts. [Paras 9, 10 and 11]


ORDER


1. This appeal by special leave has been filed by Rajindra Singh, (since deceased) whose legal representatives have been brought on record, against the judgment and order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad dated 16th September, 1999 in Execution Second Appeal No. 870/1976 whereby the Second Appeal filed by the defendant-appellant has been dismissed.

2. The brief facts giving rise to this appeal are that Smt. Prem Mai and Sudha Mai filed a suit for declaration and possession of the suit land in the Trial Court being Suit No. 487/57. The said suit was decreed against the appellant herein on 21.9.63. Aggrieved against that decree, the appellant- defendant preferred an appeal which was allowed on 16.4.64 and the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court was reversed by the First Appellant Court. The First Appellant Court was of the view that the defendant-appellant was in cultivatory possession of the land in dispute since before the commencement of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1951, and the suit was barred by time in view of Section 180 U.P. Tenancy Act, and hence the defendant had become a Sirdar.

3. Aggrieved against that, the respondent herein preferred Second Appeal before the High Court which was also dismissed vide order dated 10.2.1971 and the judgment passed by the First Appellate Court was affirmed. It appears that during the pendency of the suit the Trial Court had appointed a receiver (one Pitamber Singh) who took possession of the suit land. Also, Prem Mai and Sudha Mai purported to gift the suit land to the D.A.V. College Trust. After the suit was dismissed by the First Appellate Court and the said dismissal was affirmed by the High Court, the question arose about restitution of the land in question to the defendant-appellant under Section 144 CPC. However, by order dated 13.8.75 the restitution application was rejected. Aggrieved against that order, the matter was taken up in first appeal which was dismissed on 2.4.76 and then to the High Court in second appeal which was dismissed on 6.9.99. All the courts having dismissed the restitution proceedings, the appellant is before us by way of the present appeal.

4. We have heard learned counsel for the appellants and perused the record.

5. From the bare facts it is apparent that the suit against the appellant was dismissed by the First Appellate Court which held that the appellant is the Sirdar of the land in question, and that judgment has been affirmed by the High Court on 10.2.71 in S.A. 215 of 1964, which order became final. Hence in the ordinary course the appellant would be entitled to possession of the suit land. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the view taken by the High Court by its order dated 6.9.99 and courts below cannot be sustained.

6. However, we have been informed by learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 that after these proceedings were over, the defendant-appellant had entered into an agreement to sell with respondent No. 2 for sale of the suit land. An application for bringing on record these subsequent facts has been filed by respondent No. 2. Since that agreement to sell was not acted upon, respondent No. 2 has filed a civil suit being Suit No. 242 of 2002 before the Civil Judge, Dehradun for enforcement of the said agreement, and the legal representatives of the appellant have also filed a suit against respondent No. 2. In the said proceedings an interim order of status quo has been passed in April, 2002 by the Trial Court. However, this is not the subject matter before us and we do not wish to express any opinion on this issue. So far as the present case is concerned, we are of the opinion that after the title of Rajindra Singh (since deceased) has been upheld by the High Court on 10.2.71 he or his legal representatives would ordinarily have been entitled to take possession of the suit land. Therefore, the view taken by the Allahabad High Court in the impugned order dated 6.9.99 cannot be sustained and consequently the same is set aside. However, in view of the subsequent order of status quo passed in Suit No. 242 of 2002 for enforcement of the agreement to sell pending between the parties, we do not wish to express any opinion thereon.

7. Insofar as the present proceedings are concerned, we set aside the impugned judgment and order of the High Court and allow this appeal. The appellant would ordinarily have been entitled to possession of the suit land but because of the interim order of status quo passed in Suit No. 242 of 2002, we direct that the possession of the suit land shall be subject to orders passed in those proceedings.

8. The appeal is allowed. No order as to costs.

9. Before parting with this case we would like to express our anguish at the delay in disposal of cases in our law courts. The present case is a typical illustration. A suit filed in 1957 has rolled on for half a century. It reminds one of the case Jarndyce v. Jarndyce in Charles Dickens' novel 'Bleak House' which had rolled on for decades, consuming litigants and lawyers alike.

10. We may quote a passage from 'Bleak House' written in Dickens' inimitable style :-

"Jarndyce and Jarndyce drones on. This scarecrow of a suit has, in course of time, become so complicated, that no man alive knows what it means. The parties to it understand it least; but it has been observed that no two Chancery lawyers can talk about it for five minutes, without coming to a total disagreement as to all the premises. Innumerable children have been born into the cause; innumerable young people have married into it; innumerable old people have died out of it. Scores of persons have deliriously found themselves made parties in Jarndyce and Jarndyce, without knowing how or why; whole families have inherited legendry hatreds with the suit. The little plaintiff or defendant, who was promised a new rocking-horse when Jarndyce and Jarndyce should be settled, has grown up, possessed himself of a real horse, and trotted away into the other world. Fair wards of court have faded into mothers and grandmothers; a long procession of Chancellors has come in and gone out; the legion of bills in the suit have been transformed into mere bills of mortality; there are not three Jarndyces left upon the earth perhaps, since old Tom Jarndyce in despair blew his brains out at a coffee house in Chancery Lane; but Jarndyce and Jarndyce still drags its dreary length before the court, perennially hopeless."

Is this not descriptive of the situation prevailing in India today ?

11. People in India are simply disgusted with this state of affairs, and are fast losing faith in the judiciary because of the inordinate delay in disposal of cases. We request the concerned authorities to do the needful in the matter urgently to ensure speedy disposal of cases if the people's faith in the judiciary is to remain.

**********
