HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Section 396/34 - Robbery and murder at PW.1's pawn shop - On basis of confessional statements of accused 'R' and 'N', jewels recovered - Said jewels identified by PW.1 as also by PW7 to PW14 who had pledged jewels with PW1 - Evidence of PW-1 corroborated by registers maintained in his Pawn shop to show that those jewels were pledged with him - Involvement of accused 'R and 'N'  in commission of dacoity proved by evidence of PW-15 [who recorded 'R's confessional statement] and PW-17.  Held, since commission of offence under Section 396 is proved against 'R' and 'N', their conviction recorded by courts below under Section 396 is unassailable.
HELD
There is clear and cogent evidence against accused Raja Mohammad and Babu @ Nawab Sahib as to their involvement in the commission of dacoity by the evidence of PW-15 and PW-17 and by recovery of various items of jewels. The jewels so recovered from the accused were identified by the owner of the Pawn shop (PW-1) and PWs 7 to 14 who pledged the jewels with PW-1. Evidence of PW-1 is further corroborated by the registers maintained in his Pawn shop to show that those items of jewels were pledged in his Pawn shop. The conviction of the appellants Raja Mohammad and Babu @ Nawab Sahib under Section 396 IPC is unassailable. (Para 8)
Section 396/34 - Hostile witness - Case of murder and dacoity - Accused 'B' and 'S' arrested in presence of PWs.21 and 22 - These two witnesses partially turned hostile - They admitted that two accused were on bike, when intercepted by police and jewels were recovered from said bike, but failed to identify 'B' and 'S'. Held, as rightly held by Trial Court turning hostile of witnesses will not affect prosecution's case. Their evidence has to be read alongwith I.O. (PW37)'s evidence who spoke of arrest of accused and recovery of articles. The recovered jewels were identification by PW.1, the owner of pawn shop where dacoity took place.
Section 396/34 - Murder and dacoity - Imposition of punishment - Whether companions of a dacoit who committed murder are also liable for punishment under Section 396, even though they participated only in dacoity - Section 396 prescribes punishment for both dacoity and murder. Held, all companions will be liable to be convicted, irrespective of their participation in murder. (Para 9)
Section 396 - Dacoity and murder - Sentencing under Section 302 vis-a-vis sentencing under Section 396. Held, obligation of court in the matter of imposing sentence “death or imprisonment for life” is in the same sequence both for Sections 302 and 396. Though offence under Section 396 is to be viewed with seriousness, larger discretion is vested with the court insofar as there is possibility of imposing a penalty lesser than death or imprisonment for life for conviction under Section 396. (Para 9)
Section 396/34 - Murder and dacoity - Sentencing - Sentence of 10 years RI enhanced to life imprisonment by High Court - Justification - Accused were not armed  - Accused 'N' had sat on deceased and pressed nose and mouth and tightened his neck with rope - Incident took place in 2002. Held, on facts sentence of imprisonment for life is modified to ten years' RI.
HELD
In the case, the accused were not armed. Accused Babu @ Nawab Sahib is alleged to have sat on deceased Muthukrishnan and pressed his nose and mouth and is alleged to have tightened his neck with the rope. The occurrence was of the year 2002. Considering the long lapse of time and the facts and circumstances of the case, the sentence of imprisonment for life is modified as ten years as directed by the trial court. (Para 10)
While maintaining the conviction under Section 396 IPC, the sentence of imprisonment imposed upon the appellants-Basheer, Shajahan and Babu @ Nawab Sahib is modified as ten years of imprisonment and the appeals are partly allowed. Since the appellants are stated to be in custody for more than ten years, the appellants are ordered to be released forthwith, if not required in any other case. (Para 11)

CASES REFERRED
1.  Dinesh alias Buddha v. State of Rajasthan [JT 2006 (3) SC 66] (Para 10)


R. BANUMATHI, J.
1. These appeals arise out of the common judgment passed by the High Court of Madras in Criminal Appeal Nos. 69, 1096 and 1097 of 2006 allowing the appeal preferred by the State thereby enhancing the sentence of imprisonment from ten years to imprisonment for life for the conviction under Section 396 IPC.
2. Briefly stated case of the prosecution is that on the intervening night of 13/14.11.2002 at about 01.30 a.m., the appellants accused Basheer (A1), Shajahan (A2) and Babu @ Nawab Sahib (A4) along with two other accused Raja Mohammad (A3) and Balu @ Balasubramanian (A5) with common intention to commit robbery in a Pawn Broking shop under the name of Peri owned by PW-1 Muthaiyah. In the course of committing robbery, Shajahan (A2) is alleged to have tightly held the legs of deceased Muthukrishnan who was sleeping inside the shop and Babu @ Nawab Sahib (A4) is alleged to have sat on his chest and constricted his neck and tied the jute rope around the neck of Muthukrishnan and strangled him to death. Other accused robbed jewellery about 4.788 kg. of gold and 5.595 kg. of silver total worth about Rs.12,00,000/-. On 13.11.2002 at about 05.30 a.m., Chellam-PW-4 employed as the sweeper at the Pawn shop came to the house of PW-1 and informed him that Muthukrishnan was found dead in his shop. PW-1 lodged the complaint in Mandharakuppam Police Station, based on which, police had registered a case in Crime No.257 of 2002 under Sections 457, 380 and 302 IPC. PW-37-SHO had taken up the investigation. On 06.02.2003 at about 11.00 p.m. Raja Mohammad (A3) was arrested near Panrutti bus stand and his confession statement was recorded in the presence of Vasan-PW-15, based on which, a sum of Rs.46,000/- was recovered from Raja Mohammad (A3). Confession statement of accused Raja Mohammad led to recovery of thirty pair of silver anklets, golden necklace and chain from Noorudheen who was identified by accused Raja Mohammad under Ex.P21. Confession statement of accused Raja Mohammad led to further recovery of silver anklets, golden rings, necklace and totally twelve items of jewels from KVM Jewellery at Kallakurichi under Ex.P23. Confession statement of accused Raja Mohammad also led to recovery of seventeen pair of silver anklets, twenty pair of silver pattadai anklets and a golden chain from his house at Pudupet in Vridhachalam.
3. Accused Raja Mohammad took the police and PW-15 to Alichakudi village and on being identified by him, Babu @ Nawab Sahib (A4) was arrested. Based on the confession statement of accused Babu @ Nawab Sahib, seventeen items of jewels were recovered from the house of his mother’s sister under Ex.P28. Based on the confession statement of Babu @ Nawab Sahib (A4), the police went to Mumbai where numbers of items of jewels were recovered from the house of his uncle and also from a jewellery shop named Panchaseel Jewellery.
4. On 06.02.2003 at wee hours at about 01.30 a.m. appellants Basheer (A1) and Shajahan (A2) were proceeding on a TVS-50 motor cycle and on being intercepted by the police, the appellants started running and the police caught hold of them. Based on the confession statements of accused Basheer and Shajahan, jewels kept in the cover on the petrol tank of the said TVS-50 vehicle, were recovered by the police. On the basis of the information from the informers, PW-37 arrested Balu @ Balasubramanian (A5) in front of his house at Meyapalayur village on 08.02.2003 at about 04.00 a.m. His confession statement led to recovery of golden jewels from a jewellery shop at Chidambaram. Confession statement of accused Balu @ Balasubramanian further led to recovery of gold jewels from his house (Ex.P33). On completion of investigation, chargesheet was filed against the accused under Sections 457, 395, 396 and 302 read with 34 IPC.
5. In the trial court, prosecution has examined thirty seven witnesses, including PW-1-owner of the Pawn shop, PW-2 and PW-3 working under PW-1 and other witnesses. Upon consideration of evidence, the trial court convicted all the five accused inter alia under Section 396 IPC read with Section 34 IPC and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years. The trial court held that in view of the conviction of the accused under Section 396 IPC, conviction of the accused under Section 302 IPC was not necessary.
6. Being aggrieved by the conviction, accused Shajahan and Raja Mohammad filed appeals before the High Court which came to be dismissed. In the appeal filed by the State, for conviction under Section 396 IPC, the High Court enhanced the sentence of imprisonment from ten years to imprisonment for life. The High Court did not go into the question of conviction of the accused under Section 302 IPC.
7. We have heard the learned counsel for both the parties and perused the materials on record.
8. There is clear and cogent evidence against accused Raja Mohammad and Babu @ Nawab Sahib as to their involvement in the commission of dacoity by the evidence of PW-15 and PW-17 and by recovery of various items of jewels. The jewels so recovered from the accused were identified by the owner of the Pawn shop (PW-1) and PWs 7 to 14 who pledged the jewels with PW-1. Evidence of PW-1 is further corroborated by the registers maintained in his Pawn shop to show that those items of jewels were pledged in his Pawn shop. The conviction of the appellants Raja Mohammad and Babu @ Nawab Sahib under Section 396 IPC is unassailable.
9. Accused Basheer and Shajahan were arrested in the presence of PW-21-Anbalagan and PW-22-Vijayarangan who partially turned hostile. In his evidence, PW-21 stated that two persons were coming on the TVS-50 and on being intercepted by the police, they started running and those persons were chased and were caught by the police and the police recovered jewels from the cover kept on the petrol tank of the said vehicle. Though PWs 21 and 22 have spoken about the two persons and recovery of jewels from the said two wheeler, they have not identified accused Basheer and Shajahan. As observed by the trial court, case of the prosecution is not discredited, merely because PWs 21 and 22 have turned hostile so far as identification of accused. As pointed out by the trial court, evidence of PWs 21 and 22 is to be read along with the evidence of Investigating Officer (PW-37) who has clearly spoken about Basheer and Shajahan were proceeding on the two wheeler TVS-50 and also spoken about the arrest and recovery of jewels. The jewels recovered from Basheer and Shajahan were also identified by PW-1-owner of the Pawn shop. The fact that PWs 21 and 22 turned hostile does not affect the prosecution case as to the involvement of Basheer and Shajahan in the commission of the offence of dacoity. Section 396 IPC prescribes punishment for dacoity with murder. In the course of commission of dacoity, if a dacoit commits murder, all his companions who are conjointly committing dacoity, are liable to be convicted under Section 396 IPC, although they may have no participation in the murder beyond the fact of participation in the dacoity. The obligation of the court in the matter of imposing the sentence - “death or imprisonment for life” is in the same sequence both for Sections 302 IPC and 396 IPC. Though the offence under Section 396 IPC is to be viewed with seriousness, for the conviction under Section 396 IPC, larger discretion is vested with the court insofar as there is possibility of imposing a penalty lesser than death or imprisonment for life for the conviction under Section 396 IPC.
10. Placing reliance upon Dinesh alias Buddha v. State of Rajasthan [JT 2006 (3) SC 66], the High Court took the view that commission of murder in the course of dacoity is to be viewed with seriousness. We are also of the view that the offence under Section 396 IPC is to be viewed with seriousness, especially, when the dacoits are armed. But in the case in hand, the accused were not armed. Accused Babu @ Nawab Sahib is alleged to have sat on deceased Muthukrishnan and pressed his nose and mouth and is alleged to have tightened his neck with the rope. The occurrence was of the year 2002. Considering the long lapse of time and the facts and circumstances of the case, the sentence of imprisonment for life is modified as ten years as directed by the trial court.
11. While maintaining the conviction under Section 396 IPC, the sentence of imprisonment imposed upon the appellants-Basheer, Shajahan and Babu @ Nawab Sahib is modified as ten years of imprisonment and the appeals are partly allowed. Since the appellants are stated to be in custody for more than ten years, the appellants are ordered to be released forthwith, if not required in any other case.
**********
CROSS CITATION
2009 AIR (SC) 1803
2008 (17) SCR 1364
APPEARANCES
Dr. Rajeev B. Masoodkar and Mr. Anil K. Jha, Advocates for the Appellants.
Mr. Anuj Prakash and Mr. Gopal Singh, Advocates for the Respondent.
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Sections 34, 302 - Evidence Act, 1872, Section 3 - Common intention - Murder - About 11 persons coming together - All armed - Asking for particular person - Quarrel led to shooting of another person. Held that the very fact that they came together with many arms would show that common intention was formed to commit murder. (Para 16)

Sections 34, 302 - Evidence Act, 1872, Section 3 - Common intention - Murder - Several persons coming armed - Asking for particular person - On intervention, shooting another. Held that it cannot be said that they had no common intention to cause offence of murder. (Para 17)

Sections 34, 302 - Evidence Act, 1872, Section 3 - Common intention - Murder - Evidence - Several persons appearing - All armed with various weapons - One of them armed with gandasa, gave blow on head - All leaving together, firing shots together to prevent PWs to come near. Held that common intention is proved. (Para 18)

Sections 34, 302 - Evidence Act, 1872, Section 3 - Common intention - Murder - Evidence - Genesis of occurrence proved - Motive for offence established. Held that common intention may develop at spot. Longer interval is not required in forming common intention and doing of an act. (Para 18)

CASES REFERRED
1.Nishan Singh v. State of Punjab [2008 (3) Scale 416] (Para 20)

2.Prakash v. State of Madhya Pradesh [2006 (13) SCC 508] (Para 21)

3.Mohan Singh v. State of Punjab [AIR 1963 SC 174] (Para 19)

S.B. SINHA, J.

1. Appellants, who are three in number, are before us aggrieved by and dissatisfied with a judgment and order dated 9.8.2005 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Patna dismissing the Criminal Appeals preferred by them and thereby upholding the judgments of conviction and sentence dated 9.1.2002 and 11.1.2002 passed by the 7th Additional Sessions Judge, Nalanda.

2. Appellants, the deceased and the prosecution witnesses are residents of village Govindpur, P.S. Silao in the District of Nalanda (Bihar). The prosecution case, shorn of all unnecessary details, is as under:

2.1. On or about 29.5.1997 at about 3 p.m. Sanjib Yadav (informant) along with his father Mauji Yadav ("the deceased") were working in his field. Lakhan Yadav, Ragho Yadav, Anil Yadav, Inderdeo Yadav, Ramjee Yadav and Dwarika Yadav were sitting under the shadow of a Pipal tree at some distance.

2.2. Accused persons who were eleven in number, including the appellants herein, armed with country made gun, country made rifle, country made pistol, Gandasa, along with four to five unknown persons armed with firearms came to the place of occurrence and started abusing the informant and his father. They are said to have inquired about one Patali and asking him to come out.

2.3. The deceased advised them not to fight whereupon Ramdeo Kahar (Accused No. 4) made an exhortation whereupon Upendra Kahar (Accused No. 1) shot from his gun hitting the deceased on the right side of the stomach over his waist. He tried to flee away but fell down in the field of Prayag Yadav. Ramdeo Kahar (Accused No.4) assaulted Ragho Yadav (P.W. 7) with lathi on his left hand and Shiv Shankar Paswan (Accused No. 5) assaulted Anil Yadav (P.W. 6) with Gandasa on his head. Accused persons thereafter made good their escape. The deceased, however, while being taken to the hospital breathed his last. The motive for commission of the said offence was said to be long standing enmity between the parties. It was furthermore alleged that on or about 28.5.1997 while some female members of the informant's family were bringing water from a well, Upendra Kahar (Accused No. 1) in a state of intoxication misbehaved with them to which Patali Yadav objected wherefor he was threatened by the Accused No.1.

3. A large number of witnesses were examined by the prosecution in support of its case.

The learned Sessions Judge relying upon the evidences of P.W.1 - Inderdeo Yadav, P.W.2 - Ramjee Yadav, P.W. 3 - Lakhan Yadav, P.W. 4 - Dwarika Yadav, P.W. 5 - Ramadhin Yadav, P.W. 8 - Sanjib Yadav (informant) as also the evidences of the injured witnesses P.W. 6 - Anil Yadav and P.W. 7 - Ragho Yadav; held that the prosecution had proved its case.

4. The learned Sessions Judge, however, while recording a judgment of conviction against the appellants herein acquitted the other eight accused persons, stating:

"...All the witnesses have stated that it was Ramdeo Kahar who passed an order upon which Upendra Kahar fired causing fatal injury to Mauji. Ramdeo further assaulted Ragho Yadav with Lathi on his left hand and Sheo Shankar Paswan gave a Gandasa blow on the head of Anil Yadav. Except these three accused persons no overt act has been alleged against any other accused persons or even whispered a single word against them although all were alleged to have been armed with rifle, gun and pistol. The prosecution case is that only one shot was fired by Upendra Kahar. The remaining accused persons who were also armed with lethal weapons did not commit any overt act nor they used their arms against any one. The learned defence counsel further submitted that the remaining eight accused persons have been falsely implicated in this case without any basis. If they would have present at the place of occurrence armed with lethal weapons as have been alleged they must have committed some overt act but not a single witness whispered a single word that the remaining eight accused persons even touched the body of any of the persons of the prosecution party. It has been further submitted that one of the accused Shankar Ram was arrested by the I.O. from the house of his brother-in-law Upendra Kahar in the night of 29.5.97 itself. During investigation it has come that in the night intervening 27/28th of May 1997 he slept on the roof of the house of his father-in-law and he fell down from the roof and sustained injuries in his both legs and at the time of occurrence he was lying injured in the house of the father-in-law. His complicity in the alleged occurrence was found to be false and accordingly he was not charge- sheeted but cognizance was taken against him also. The paper regarding his treatment has been brought on record as ext. C and C/1. D.W. 2 in para 15 of his cross-examination has stated that the fracture which Shankar Ram sustained might be caused due to fall.

23. Taking into account all the facts and circumstances of the case and the evidence available on the record the involvement and complicity of the accused persons namely Bilas Paswan, Arbind Paswan, Shankar Ram, Lallan Paswan @ Lalin Paswan, Nagina Paswan, Bengali Kahar, Dashrath Kahar and Mahendra Kahar appears to be highly doubtful and therefore all these accused persons are acquitted giving them benefit of doubt."

5. It has, however, been brought on record that a First Information Report (for short, "FIR") was also lodged by Accused No. 5 against the prosecution witnesses under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code (for short, "the IPC") for causing injury to him and Nagina Paswan. What has happened to the said case, however, is not known.

6. Appellants in their defence examined Ashok Kumar Acharya (D.W.1), a Sub-Inspector of Police who had examined Accused No. 5 and Nagina Paswan and prepared requisitions for their medical treatment. D.W. 2 - Dr. Atma Nand Kumar examined them and found the following injuries on their person.

"On the person of Nagina Paswan he found the following injuries:

(i) lacerated wound 1" x ï¿½ " x muscle deep on lateral aspect of left sole.

(ii) Abrasion ï¿½" x ï¿½" on middle portion of left sole.

The injuries were caused by hard and blunt substance.

On the person of Shiv Shankar Paswan he found the following injuries:

(1) Lacerated wound ï¿½" x ï¿½" x muscle deep on upper portion of lateral aspect of left fore arm.

(2) Abrasion ï¿½" x ï¿½" on upper portion of lateral aspect of left fore arm.

These injuries too were caused by hard blunt substance."

7. As regards the injuries suffered by Nagina Paswan and Accused No.5, the learned trial judge opined that the same might have been caused due to fall. The High Court held:

"It is, thus, to be seen that the injuries on the persons of accused were so trivial and nominal that they required hardly any explanation by the prosecution. Having regard to the nature of the injuries it can not even be ruled out that those were caused by some friendly hands."

8. Dr. Rajeev B. Masoodkar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants would submit:

i. Admittedly, the accused persons having come to cause murder of Patali, the appellants cannot be said to have formed any common intention to commit the offence of murdering Mauji Yadav.

ii. As the assault on the hands of P.W. 7 - Ragho Yadav is said to have been caused by Ramdeo Kahar (Accused No. 4) and that on Anil Yadav (P.W. 6) having been caused by Shiv Shankar Paswan (Accused No. 5) after the shot was fired, they could not have been held guilty for commission of offence punishable under Section 302/34 of the IPC.

iii. The entire prosecution case must be considered on three parts, i.e., (1) coming of the mob, exhortation by accused no. 4 and firing of a shot by accused No. 1; (2) individual assaults by accused Nos. 4 and 5 on Ragho Yadav and Anil Yadav; and (3) injuries caused on Nagina Paswan and Shiv Shankar Paswan (accused No. 5) by the prosecution witnesses.

iv. The learned Sessions Judge, as also the High Court committed a serious error insofar as they failed to take into consideration that an FIR was also lodged against the prosecution witnesses and two of them suffered injuries which had not been explained by the prosecution and in the aforementioned situation the conviction of Ramdeo Kahar (accused No. 4) and Shiv Shankar Paswan (accused No. 5) must be held to be bad in law.

9. Mr. Anuj Prakash, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State, on the other hand, would contend that keeping in view the manner in which the incident took place, namely, appellants came together with fire arms, caused death of Mauji Yadav by using firearms and went back together is a pointer to show that they had a common intention to commit the crime.

10. The prosecution examined eight witnesses in support of its case. The fact that Mauji Yadav suffered a homicidal death is not in dispute.

The post-mortem examination of the deceased was conducted by P.W.12 - Dr. Shashi Bhushan Singh, who found the following ante-mortem injuries suffered by the deceased:

"One wound of entry 1" in diameter with inverted charred margin with bleeding over right iliac fossa near anterior - superior iliac spine was present."

The High Court noticed:

"On dissection the abdominal cavity was found full of blood, about 500 c.c. in volume. Liver, was ruptured and embedded with bullet like structure' on external surface with laceration of transverse colon with mesentery. Other abdominal viscera like spleen, kidney, stomach were intact."

In the opinion of the Doctor, death was caused due to shock and hemorrhage by reason of the injuries caused by a firearm damaging vital organs. The medical report, thus, corroborates that Mauji Yadav was killed by gun shot injuries.

11. P.W. 11 - Dr. Awadhesh Pd. examined Ragho Yadav (P.W.7) and Anil Yadav (PS 6) and found the following injuries on their person as noticed in the judgment of the High Court.

"On the person of Ragho Yadav, he found the following injuries which according to him were caused by some hard and blunt substance:

"I. Lacerated bleeding wound over middle of back of left fore hand size ï¿½" x ï¿½" x 1/6".

II. Reddish bruise over back of left arm, size 3" x 1".

On the person of Anil Yadav, P.W.11 found the following injuries:

(i) Incised bleeding wound with clean cut margin over left parietal area of head.

'Size of injury - 2 2/1" x ï¿½" x ï¿½"

(ii) Tender swelling with redness over back region of head.

Size - 1 ï¿½" diameter.

Injury No. (i) was caused by some sharp cutting instrument while injury No. (ii) was caused by some hard and blunt substance."

12. The FIR had been lodged only within two hours.

The prosecution case, inter alia, was proved by six eye-witnesses and two injured eye-witnesses. It had clearly been proved that the appellants and others variously armed came to the place where the deceased was standing in the field. They asked whereabouts of Patali stating that he would be killed. On a reply by the deceased that Patali was not there and that there was no use for fighting, Accused No. 4 gave exhortation that he should be killed, whereupon Accused No. 1 fired a shot from his country made rifle which had hit on the right side of his abdomen, slightly above the waist as a result whereof he took a few steps and fell down in the land of Prayag Yadav.

When P.W. 7 - Ragho Yadav and P.W.6 -Anil Yadav ran towards the deceased, they were not only intercepted, but also assaulted by Accused No. 4 and Accused No. 5. Whereas a lathi blow was given on the person of Ragho Yadav (P.W. 7) by Accused No.4; Anil Yadav (P.W. 6), who was coming behind him was given a Gandasa blow on his head by Accused No. 5 as a result of which he fell down.

13. Indisputably, thereafter all the accused fled away together and while doing so they made indiscriminate firing from their weapons. The injured witnesses P.W. 6 and P.W.7 described the entire occurrence in great details. We need not refer to their evidences as veracity thereof is not seriously in question.

14. Appellants in their examination under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure did not question the homicidal nature of death of Mauji Yadav. It was, however, contended that the prosecution witnesses had fired at Shiv Shankar Paswan (Accused No. 5) and caused injury to Nagina Paswan and in the process Mauji Yadav was killed by his own men.

15. The defence of the appellants, in our opinion, has rightly been rejected by the courts below. Unlike the learned Sessions Judge or the High Court, we would, however, assume that the prosecution has not explained the injuries suffered by Nagina Paswan and Accused No. 5. The injuries suffered by them were caused by a hard and blunt substance. The injuries were simple in nature. They were not caused on any vital part of the body. Whereas Nagina Paswan suffered injuries on his left sole, Accused No. 5 suffered injuries on his left fore arm. It is because of the nature of the injuries, the learned Sessions Judge opined that the same might have been caused by a fall. That may or may not be correct. But the fact that they suffered simple injuries itself shows that non-explanation thereof would not be sufficient to brush aside the prosecution case, particularly when the case of the defence that one of them had suffered gun shot injury had not been proved.

We, therefore, agree with the findings of the courts below that death of Mauji Yadav and the injuries suffered by the P.W.6 and P.W. 7 took place in the manner stated by the prosecution.

16. The question which now arises for consideration is as to whether appellants can be said to have formed a common intention. Indisputably, they came together. They were also searching for one Patali. The very fact that all of them came heavily armed and that too with many firearms clearly goes to show that a common intention was formed to commit a murder.

17. Only because they did not find Patali and instead committed the murder of Mauji Yadav by itself may not be sufficient to arrive at a conclusion that they had no intention to commit any offence of causing murder. Furthermore, whether they had the requisite intention or not must also be judged from the surrounding circumstances. Admittedly, Upendra Kahar (Accused No.1) fired a shot on exhortation by Ramdeo Kahar (Accused No. 4). It has furthermore been proved that both Accused No. 4 and Accused No. 5 used the weapons in their hands in foiling the attempts of Ragho Yadav (P.W. 7) and Anil Yadav (P.W. 6) to come to the place of occurrence to help the deceased.

18. Shiv Shankar Paswan (Accused No. 5) was carrying a Gandasa; he had given a Gandasa blow on the head of Anil Yadav, a vital part of his body. All of them also left the place of occurrence together; they fired shot together at random so as to prevent the prosecution witnesses to chase them. Common intention of the appellants, in our opinion, had, thus, been proved. Even otherwise, common intention may develop suddenly at the spot. In this case, the genesis of the occurrence has been proved. The motive for commission of the offence has sufficiently been established. The law does not state that there has to be a long interval of time between the formation of the common intention and the doing of the act. The prosecution also is not required to adduce direct evidence as regards formation of common intention. Thus, it must be inferred from the surrounding circumstances.

19. If an unlawful assembly was formed and if an offence was committed by a member of the unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common object and with a knowledge that the same is likely to be committed in prosecution thereof, the common intention must be said to have been proved. When a common intention is proved, each of the persons sharing the common intention is constructively liable for the criminal act done by one of them. {see Mohan Singh v. State of Punjab [AIR 1963 SC 174]}

20. In Nishan Singh v. State of Punjab [2008 (3) Scale 416], this Court held:

"20. In that case, two separate trials were held in the sense that the examination in chief and the cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses were over, when the trial restarted. It was in that factual matrix, this Court laid down the afore-mentioned proposition of law.

Sub-section 4 of Section 319 CrPC, however, must be read with the residuary provision contained in of Section 375 thereof. Complaint in regard to non compliance of statutory provisions must be made at the earliest opportunity. When a judgment is pronounced; a case must be made out that by reason of a procedural irregularity, failure of justice has occurred. Section 465 of the Code of Criminal Procedure seeks to achieve a salutary principle. 21. What would constitute 'failure to justice' came up for consideration before this Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhooraji and Ors.[JT 2001 (7) SC 55], wherein, inter alia, it was held that:

"We conclude that the trial held by the Sessions Court reaching the judgment impugned before the High Court in appeal was conducted by a court of competent jurisdiction and the same cannot be erased merely on account of a procedural lapse, particularly when the same happened at a time when the law which held the field in the State of Madhya Pradesh was governed by the decision of the Full Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court."

In Dr. M.C. Sulkunte v. State of Mysore [AIR 1971 SC 508], this Court held:

'It has been emphasized in a number of decisions of this Court that to set aside a conviction it must be shown that there has been miscarriage of justice as a result of an irregular investigation.'"

21. Dr. Masoodkar, however, has relied upon a decision of this Court in Prakash v. State of Madhya Pradesh [2006 (13) SCC 508] wherein it was held:

"19. Proof of participation by acceptable evidence in certain circumstances would lead to a conclusion that the accused had a common intention to commit the offence. Presence or absence of community of interests may not be of much significance. Each case, however, has to be considered on its own merit. Facts of each case may have to be dealt with differently. Common intention may develop on the spot. Although a pre- arranged plan and meeting of minds is one of the pre-requisites to infer common intention, a prior concert, however, can be inferred from the conduct of the accused. The role played by him, the injuries inflicted and the mode and manner in which the same was done as also the conduct of all the accused are required to be taken into consideration for arriving at a finding as to whether the accused shared a common intention with others or not. Common intention may have to be inferred also from other relevant circumstances of the case. The totality of the circumstances must be taken into consideration in arriving at such a conclusion"

As noticed in the said decision each case depends on its own facts. In that case itself it was noticed:

"28. Common intention on the part of the Appellant herein is evident. All the accused were armed with lathis. The deceased was unarmed. He was taken by surprise. He started running, but was chased. The witnesses intervened. They tried to pacify the appellant and the co-accused. They did not pay any heed thereto. They for the purpose of committing the assault even jumped over a hedge. As the deceased was running, evidently a blow on leg was given so as to stop him from doing so. Evidently he fell down, which facilitated the other accused to cause injuries on his person, including the fatal injury on his head."

22. In this case also the deceased tried to pacify the appellants and other co-accused to which also they did not pay any heed. In fact, the genesis of the occurrence started at the instance of Ramdeo Kahar (Accused No. 4) himself who gave exhortation to Upendra Kahar (Accused No. 1).

23. For the reasons aforementioned, we do not find any infirmity in the impugned judgment of the High Court. The appeals are dismissed.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973
Sections 366, 354 (3) - Penal Code, 1860, Section 302 - Death sentence - Award of - Accused, a police constable having licensed gun - Under influence of liquor, killing 3 persons of a family and injuring three others - All unarmed - Quarrel among ladies on trivial matter. Held that it was not a rarest of rare case inviting capital punishment. Sentence modified to life imprisonment. Case law discussed.
HELD
In Rajendra Prasad v. State of U.P.. Court held that neither the shocking nature of the crime nor the number of murders committed was the criterion to determine whether death sentence should be imposed. It was held that the special reasons necessary for imposing death penalty must not relate to the crime as such but to the criminal. (Para 7)

Even if only one person is killed, the gruesome or shocking nature of the crime and/or the motive for the murder may make it the rarest among rare cases deserving death penalty. On the other hand, murder of even two or three persons may not invite death penalty where there is no premeditation, no cruelty or torture of the victim or where the act is not diabolic. (Para 7)

There can be no doubt that this is not a case which calls for imposition of death sentence. This is not a murder to satisfy any greed or lust. This is not a case involving cruelty to or torture of the victim. This is not a case where the act is brutal, diabolic or revolting. The accused has no bad antecedents nor is a hard core criminal nor an anti- social nor an anti-national element. The action was impulsive and without premeditation arising out of a sudden quarrel. Each of the victims was shot at only once. The repeated firing by appellant is an over-reaction of an inebriated brain to a petty issue. (Para 8)

The mitigating circumstances have not been given their due importance. On a careful balancing of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances, we find that in spite of the gravity of the crime involving triple murder, the aggravating circumstances noticed and enumerated by the High Court do not outweigh, much less overwhelmingly, the mitigating circumstances. This is not that rarest of rare case, which invites death penalty. (Para 8)

CASES REFERRED
1.Bablu v. State of Rajasthan [AIR 2007 SC 697] (Para 5)

2.Renuka Bai v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2006 (8) SC 282] (Para 9)

3.Saibanna v. State of Karnataka [2005 (4) SCC 15] (Para 9)

4.Dayanidhi Bisoi v. State of Orissa [JT 2003 (5) SC 590] (Para 9)

5.Rajasthan v. Kheraj Ram [JT 2003 (7) SC 419] (Para 5)

6.Lehna v. State of Haryana [JT 2002 (Suppl.1) SC 577] (Para 5)

7.Machhi Singh v. State of Punjab [1983 (3) SCR 413 (Para 5)

8.Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab [1980 (2) SCC 684] (Para 5)

9.Rajendra Prasad v. State of U.P. [1979 (3) SCR 78] (Para 7)

10.Dalbir Singh v. State of Punjab [1979 (3) SCR 1059] (Para 7)

R. V. Raveendran, J.

1. In this appeal by special leave, the common judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court dated 22.12.2006 in Murder Reference No. 12 of 2005 and Criminal Appeal No. 10-DB of 2006, affirming the conviction and sentence of death imposed on the appellant by the Sessions Judge, Sangrur by judgment dated 7.12.2005 in Sessions Case No.25 of 2003 is under challenge.

2. The appellant Des Raj is a retired police constable. Chand Singh, the complainant is a distant relative of Des Raj. Des Raj and Chand Singh with their respective families reside in adjoining houses. On 16.2.2003, both families attended the Bhog ceremony in connection with the Birth Anniversary of Baba Ravi Dass and returned home in the afternoon. Des Raj was fully drunk when he returned home. At about 4 p.m., a quarrel arose between Manjit Kaur (wife of Chand Singh) and Jaswant Kaur (wife of Des Raj), when Manjit Kaur objected to the family members of Des Raj throwing rubbish in front of her house. On hearing the quarrel, Chand Singh's brothers - Lal Singh and Bhagwan Singh, and Chand Singh's son - Shamsher Singh, and nephew Tarlok Singh came out of his house. Des Raj also came out of his house along with his three sons and two daughters-in-law. Des Raj was carrying his licensed double barrel gun. Des Raj shouted that if the family members of Chand Singh raised their voice, he would finish them, and fired a shot towards Manjit Kaur, which hit the left side of her head. She collapsed and died. Shamsher Singh, son of Chand Singh, rushed to the rescue of his mother. Des Raj fired another shot which hit the right hand of Shamsher Singh. Shamsher Singh raised an alarm. Bhagwan Singh and Lal Singh, the two brothers of Chand Singh, rushed to the assistance of Shamsher Singh. Des Raj re-loaded his gun and fired at them. Bhagwan Singh was hit on the left side of the chest and died. Lal Singh was hit on left side of his abdomen (and died later in the hospital). Des Raj again loaded his gun and fired towards Chand Singh which hit him on his right arm. A few pellets also hit his nephew Tarlok Singh and a neighbourhood child Raveena. According to the prosecution, all through this, the family members of Des Raj (his wife, three sons and two daughters-in-law) exhorted Des Raj by shouting 'do not leave any members of the family alive'. After the incident, Des Raj and his family members fled from the scene.

2. Des Raj (accused No.1) and his six family members (accused 2 to 7) were charged and tried for offences under sections 148, 302/149, 307/149 and 114 IPC. The prosecution examined 14 witnesses. Chand Singh (PW-2) and his son Shamsher Singh (PW-3) who were injured eye-witnesses gave a graphic account of what transpired. After appreciating the evidence, the Sessions Judge, Sangrur by judgment dated 7.12.2005, convicted Des Raj under section 302 IPC for the murder of Manjit Kaur, Bhagwan Singh and Lal Singh and also convicted him under section 307 IPC for attempting to murder Shamsher Singh and Chand Singh. After hearing on the question of sentence, the trial court came to the conclusion that the sentence of life imprisonment was inadequate and having regard to the gravity of the offence, the appellant deserved sentence to death. Accused 2 to 7 who allegedly exhorted appellant, were acquitted. The trial court was of the view that as accused 2 to 7 were not armed, and as there was no evidence of any common object to kill Manjit Kaur and others, there was a possibility that the exhortation attributed to Accused 2 to 7 may be only to implicate them in the crime.

3. The reference seeking confirmation of sentence of death was registered as Murder Reference No.12 of 2005. The appeal filed by Des Raj against his conviction and sentence was registered as Criminal Appeal No.10-DB of 2006. The appeal filed by the State against the acquittal of accused 2 to 7 was registered as Criminal Appeal No.670-DBA of 2006. The revision petition filed by Chand Singh challenging the acquittal of accused 2 to 7 was registered as Cri. Revision No. 1835 of 2006. The four cases were heard together. By common judgment dated 22.12.2006, the High Court affirmed the judgment of the trial court, and confirmed the death sentence awarded to Des Raj. It rejected the appeal filed by Des Raj, as also the appeal filed by the State and the revision filed by Chand Singh. The High Court held that on balancing the mitigating circumstance and the following aggravating circumstances, the scales tilted in favour of death sentence :

(i)In order to impress his authority on his neighbours over a petty dispute and to satisfy his ego, Des Raj opened fire, killing three members and injuring three members of the family of a neighbour, and a child who was a bystander - - all unarmed and helpless.

(ii)Premeditation was writ large in view of the fact that Des Raj brought the gun and cartridges from inside the house, and though neither provoked, nor instigated, continued firing by loading and re-loading the gun in order to silence the voice of genuine protest. The only 'fault' of the hapless members of Chand Singh's family was that they objected to the improper act of Des Raj's wife throwing rubbish in front of their house.

(iii)Des Raj went berserk and created havoc by killing and injuring whosoever came in front of him. The accused did not even bother that bystanders are likely to be hit. He did not show any sense of remorse after the incident, but ran away.

The High Court held that the gruesome, unscrupulous and diabolic attack on unarmed and innocent men, woman and child, committed in a cold blooded manner by a person who had been trained to protect the life and liberty of the people as a Police Constable, not only shocked the judicial conscience of the court but also shocked the collective conscience of the society.

4. The said judgment is challenged in this appeal. The appellant does not challenge the finding of guilt and conviction under section 302 IPC. The challenge is restricted only to the imposition of capital punishment. The appellant drew our attention to the various mitigating circumstances and contended that this is not a rarest of rare case, requiring death sentence. The learned counsel for the State countered by relying upon the aggravating circumstances listed by the High Court. The only question that therefore arises for our consideration is whether the courts below were justified in imposing the sentence of death.

5. In Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab1 and Machhi Singh v. State of Punjab2, this Court has stated the principles and guidelines relating to award of death sentence. The principles have been reiterated in several subsequent decisions including State of Rajasthan v. Kheraj Ram1 , Lehna v. State of Haryana2 and Bablu v. State of Rajasthan3.

5.1. In Bachan Singh (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court while upholding the constitutional validity of the provision for penalty of death for murder, indicated the broad criteria which should guide the courts in the matter of sentencing a person convicted of murder under section 302 IPC. This Court held :

"As we read sections 354(3) and 235(2) and other related provisions of the Code of 1973, it is quite clear to us that for making the choice of punishment or for ascertaining the existence or absence of 'special reasons' in that context, the court must pay due regard both to the crime and the criminal. What is the relative weight to be given to the aggravating and mitigating factors, depends on the facts and circumstances of the particular case. More often than not, these two aspects are so intertwined that it is difficult to give a separate treatment to each of them. In many cases, the extremely cruel or beastly manner of the commission of murder is itself a demonstrated index of the depraved character of the perpetrator. That is why, it is not desirable to consider the circumstances of the crime and the circumstances of the criminal in two separate watertight compartments. In a sense, to kill is to be cruel and therefore all murders are cruel. But such cruelty may vary in its degree of culpability. And it is only when the culpability assumes the proportion of extreme depravity that 'special reasons' can legitimately be said to exist.

But this much can be said that in order to qualify for inclusion in the category of 'aggravating circumstances' which may form the basis of 'special reasons' in section 354(3), circumstance found on the facts of a particular case must evidence aggravation of an abnormal or special degree.

It is, therefore, imperative to voice the concern that courts, aided by the broad illustrative guidelines indicated by us, will discharge the onerous function with evermore scrupulous care and humane concern, directed along the highroad of legislative policy outlined in section 354(3), viz., that for persons convicted of murder, life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence an exception. A real and abiding concern for the dignity of human life postulates resistance to taking a life through law's instrumentality. That ought not to be done save in the rarest of rare cases when the alternative option is unquestionably foreclosed. "

(emphasis supplied)

5.2. In Machhi Singh (supra), this Court addressed the issue of practical application of the 'rarest of rare case' rule laid down in Bachan Singh :

"... every member of the community is able to live with safety without his or her own life being endangered because of the protective arm of the community and on account of the rule of law enforced by it..... Every member of the community owes a debt to the community for this protection. When ingratitude is shown instead of gratitude by 'killing' a member of the community which protects the murderer himself from being killed, or when the community feels that for the sake of self- preservation the killer has to be killed, the community may well withdraw the protection by sanctioning the death penalty. But the community will not do so in every case. It may do so 'in rarest of rare cases' when its collective conscience is so shocked that it will expect the holders of the judicial power centre to inflict death penalty irrespective of their personal opinion as regards desirability or otherwise of retaining death penalty. The community may entertain such a sentiment when the crime is viewed from the platform of the motive for, or the manner of commission of the crime, or the anti-social or abhorrent nature of the crime...."

This Court recognised that special reasons attracting death penalty may relate to manner of commission of murder, or the motive for murder, the abhorrent nature of the crime or the magnitude of the crime, or even the personality of the victim. This Court gave the following illustrations (not to be considered as exhaustive) :

(a) Manner of commission of murder : When the murder is committed in an extremely brutal, grotesque, diabolical, revolting, or dastardly manner so as to arouse intense and extreme indignation of the community. (Examples : setting a house ablaze to roast alive the victim inside; subjecting the victim to inhuman acts of torture or cruelty to bring about his death; cutting the body of the victim into pieces or dismembering the body in a fiendish manner).

(b) Motive for commission of murder : When the murder is committed for a motive which evinces total depravity and meanness. (Examples: murder by hired assassin for money or reward; or cold- blooded murder for inheriting a property to gain control over property of a person under the control of the murderer or vis-a-vis whom the murderer is in a dominating position or in a position of trust; murder is committed in the course for betrayal of the motherland).

(c) Anti-social or socially abhorrent nature of the crime : When murder of a member of a Scheduled Caste or minority community etc., is committed not for personal reasons but in circumstances which arouse social wrath. Or in cases of 'bride burning' or 'dowry deaths' or when murder is committed in order to remarry for the sake of extracting dowry once again or to marry another woman on account of infatuation.

(d) Magnitude of the crime : When the crime is enormous in proportion. For instance when multiple murders, say of all or almost all the members of a family or a large number of persons of a particular caste, community, or locality, are committed.

(e) Personality of victim of murder : When the victim of murder is an innocent child, or a helpless woman or old or infirm person or a public figure generally loved and respected by the community.

6. The following guidelines emerging from Bachan Singh (supra) and Machhi Singh (supra) will be of assistance to decide whether death sentence is warranted, on the facts and circumstances of a case :

(i) Life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception. Death sentence must be imposed only when life imprisonment appears to be an altogether inadequate punishment having regard to the relevant facts and circumstances of the crime.

(ii) There must be special reasons for imposing the sentence of death. Except in gravest cases of extreme culpability, the extreme penalty of death should not be inflicted. The circumstances of the crime should leave no alternative but to impose death sentence even after according maximum weightage to the mitigating circumstances. In short death penalty is warranted only in the rarest of rare cases.

(iii) A balance-sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances has to be drawn up. The circumstances of the 'offender' as also the circumstances of the 'crime' should go into such balance sheet. Only when the aggravating circumstances overwhelmingly outweigh the mitigating circumstances, the court should consider the option of death penalty.

7. Whether the number of persons killed has a bearing on the sentence to be imposed was considered in Rajendra Prasad v. State of U.P.1. This Court held that neither the shocking nature of the crime nor the number of murders committed was the criterion to determine whether death sentence should be imposed. It was held that the special reasons necessary for imposing death penalty must not relate to the crime as such but to the criminal. In Dalbir Singh v. State of Punjab2, the Bench which decided Rajendra Prasad, while following Rajendra Prasad, put the matter in a somewhat better perspective. It held :

"Counting the casualties is not the main criterion for sentencing to death, nor recklessness in the act of murder. The sole focus on the crime and the total farewell to the criminal and his social-personal circumstances mutilate sentencing justice."

In Bachhan Singh, the Constitution Bench did not agree with the decision in Rajendra Prasad that the special reasons necessary for imposing death penalty "must relate not to the crime as such but the criminal". It held that for making the choice of punishment or for ascertaining the existence or absence of special reasons, the court must pay due regard both to the crime and the criminal. Thus the number of persons killed when coupled with the shocking nature of other features of the crime, can certainly furnish the grounds for choice of punishment. Even if only one person is killed, the gruesome or shocking nature of the crime and/or the motive for the murder may make it the rarest among rare cases deserving death penalty. On the other hand, murder of even two or three persons may not invite death penalty where there is no premeditation, no cruelty or torture of the victim or where the act is not diabolic. We may in this context refer to the following observations in Lehna (supra) :

"It is true three lives have been lost. But at the same time, the mental condition of the accused which led to the assault cannot be lost sight of. The same may not be relevant to judge culpability, but is certainly a factor while considering question of sentence. There is no evidence of any diabolic planning to commit the crime, though cruel was the act. Deprived of his livelihood on account of the land being taken away, the accused was, as the evidence shows, exhibiting his displeasure, his resentment. Frequency of the quarrels indicates lack of any sinister planning to take away lives of the deceased. The factual scenario gives impressions of impulsive act and not planned assaults. In the peculiar background, death sentence would not be proper. A sentence of imprisonment for life will be more appropriate."

8. Applying the above principles, there can be no doubt that this is not a case which calls for imposition of death sentence. This is not a murder to satisfy any greed or lust. This is not a case involving cruelty to or torture of the victim. This is not a case where the act is brutal, diabolic or revolting. The accused has no bad antecedents nor is a hard core criminal nor an anti- social nor an anti-national element. The action was impulsive and without premeditation arising out of a sudden quarrel between appellant's wife and Chand Singh's wife. Each of the victims was shot at only once. The repeated firing by appellant is an over-reaction of an inebriated brain to a petty issue. We hasten to add that drunkenness cannot be an excuse for any brutal or diabolic acts. The entire incident occurred in the span of a few minutes. The repeated loading and firing in utter disregard for life, in the circumstances, is not an indication of extreme depravity or brutality, but of a drunken rage. The trial court and the High Court have persuaded themselves to award the death penalty by considering only the aggravating circumstances, and to an extent carried away by the fact that three died and four (two directly and two indirectly) were injured. The mitigating circumstances have not been given their due importance. On a careful balancing of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances, we find that in spite of the gravity of the crime involving triple murder, the aggravating circumstances noticed and enumerated by the High Court do not outweigh, much less overwhelmingly, the mitigating circumstances. This is not that rarest of rare case, which invites death penalty.

9. Learned counsel for the respondents relied on the decisions of this Court in Dayanidhi Bisoi v. State of Orissa1, Saibanna v. State of Karnataka2 and Renuka Bai v. State of Maharashtra3 to contend that the appellant deserved death penalty. We find that all the three decisions are clearly distinguishable on facts. All are cases of gruesome and diabolical murders which fell in the category of rarest of rare cases. In Dayanidhi, the accused who was in financial difficulties, visited the house of the deceased, enjoyed their hospitality, and during night when they were asleep, stabbed and killed the entire host family of three (husband, wife and their three year child) without provocation and stole the valuables. In Saibanna, the appellant who was released on parole, while serving the sentence of life imprisonment, suspected the fidelity of his wife and assaulted her and their minor child with a hunting knife. He inflicted as many as 21 injuries on his wife and six injuries on his minor child. As a consequence, both his wife and daughter died. In Renuka Bai, the appellant along with two others, kidnapped several minor children, used them for committing thefts and other illegal activities and killed them when they were no longer useful. As many as 13 children were kidnapped and nine out of them were killed during between 1992 and 1996. The facts of those cases are no way comparable to this case.

10. We, therefore, allow this appeal in part. While confirming the conviction under section 302 IPC, we modify the sentence of death imposed on the appellant to one of life imprisonment. The conviction and sentence under section 307 IPC remains undisturbed.

**********
CROSS CITATION
2013 AIR (SC) 3641
APPEARANCES
Mr. Neeraj Kumar Jain, Senior Advocate Mr. Kamal Singh Pundir, Mr. Pratham Kant, Mr. Anil Kimar Sharma, Mr. Rameshwar Prasad Goyal, Advocates with him for the Appellant.
Mr. Abhishek Atrey, Ms. Aishverya Shandilya, Advocates for the Respondent.
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Sections 302, 117, 201, 420, 364 - Conviction under - Murder - Allegation that appellant dishonestly induced PW2, the complainant to deliver his car and Rs 15000/- and for that he abducted and murdered deceased - Acquittal by High Court under Section 302, while maintaining conviction under Sections 117, 201 and 420 - Conviction under Section 364 modified to one under Section 365 - On appeals from both appellant and state, notice issued to appellant for reversal of acquittal under Section 302 - Application for withdrawal by appellant declined as notice issued. Held, the concurrent findings of courts below relating to other offences being supported by evidence and there being no challenge to conviction therefor, no miscarriage of justice has resulted. No interference needed. (Para 8)

Sections 302,117 201, 420, 364 - Conviction under - Corpus delicti not found - Case based on circumstantial evidence - No direct evidence to show that deceased 'A' was murdered and his dead body was disposed of by appellant - Whether conviction for murder justified when corpus delicti not found. Held, conviction in absence of corpus delicti requires clinching evidence to show that victim was murdered. There being no such evidence, conviction cannot be sustained. Rama Nand and Ors. v. State of Himachal Pradesh, Ram Chandra & Ram Bharosey v. State of Uttar Pradesh, State of Karnataka v. M. V. Mahesh, Lakshmi and Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh, referred and followed
HELD
In the absence of corpus delicti what the court looks for is clinching evidence that proves that the victim has been done to death. If the prosecution is successful in providing cogent and satisfactory proof of the victim having met a homicidal death, absence of corpus delicti will not by itself be fatal to a charge of murder. Failure of the prosecution to assemble such evidence will, however, result in failure of the most essential requirement in a case involving a charge of murder. That is precisely the position in the case at hand. There is no evidence either direct or circumstantial about Abdul Mabood having met a homicidal death. (Para 13)

Murder of 'A', alleged - No motive - Plea that appellant fraudulently induced complainant PW 2, to deliver car and money, so that he could take away the car and for said reason he killed 'A'. Held plea is baseless. Car could have been taken without killing 'A' as it was in appellant's possession. Both 'A' and appellant were together. There was no enmity between them. Appellant could have dropped him any where. However appellant was rightly convicted for his fraudulent act of grabbing the car and money. Conviction confirmed. Sukhram v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2007 (10) SC 177], Sunil Clifford David v. State of Punjab [JT 2012 (8) SC 639], Pannayar v. State of Tamil Nadu [JT 2009 (10) SC 461], referred.
HELD
It is not the case of the prosecution that there existed any enmity between Abdul Mabood and the appellant nor is there any evidence to prove any such enmity. All that was suggested by learned counsel appearing for the State was that the appellant got rid of Abdul Mabood by killing him because he intended to take away the car which the complainant-Dr. Mohd. Alam had given to him. That argument has not impressed us. If the motive behind the alleged murder was to somehow take away the car, it was not necessary for the appellant to kill the deceased for the car could be taken away even without physically harming Abdul Mabood. It was not as though Abdul Mabood was driving the car and was in control thereof so that without removing him from the scene it was difficult for the appellant to succeed in his design. The prosecution case on the contrary is that the appellant had induced the complainant to part with the car and a sum of Rs.15,000/-. The appellant has been rightly convicted for that fraudulent act which conviction we have affirmed. Such being the position, the car was already in the possession and control of the appellant and all that he was required to do was to drop Abdul Mabood at any place en route to take away the car which he had ample opportunity to do during all the time the two were together while visiting different places. Suffice it to say that the motive for the alleged murder is as weak as it sounds illogical to us. It is fairly well-settled that while motive does not have a major role to play in cases based on eye-witness account of the incident, it assumes importance in cases that rest entirely on circumstantial evidence. (Para 14)

Murder - Last seen evidence - Murder of 'A', alleged - Appellant last seen with 'A' by PWs. 7, 8 - PW 11 also saw appellant going with 'A' but returning alone - Told by Appellant that 'A' was with his friend - Whether conviction possible on basis of last seen evidence. Held, no. Though some suspicion arose but it was not enough to justify conviction. Mohibur Rahman's [JT 2002 (6) SC 235], Arjun Marik's [JT 1994 (2) SC 627], Godabarish Mishra's [JT 1996 (9) SC 708], Bharat's [JT 2003 (1) SC 635], Sanjay Thakran's [JT 2007 (5) SC 146], Bodh Raj's case, Jaswant Gir's cases referred and relied.
HELD
On 2nd July, 1986 the appellant had gone to the house of one Akash Garg P.W.7 accompanied by a boy whom the witness identified as the deceased-Abdul Mabood. The deposition of PW8 Badlu Ram, posted as a Peon at Naval Cinema, Panipat, is also to the same effect. The boy was identified by 'T' PW 11 by reference to a photograph shown to him as the alleged deceased-Abdul Mabood. According to the witness the appellant had gone away with his companion boy and when he returned at night he was all alone. He also appeared troubled and his clothes were stained with dust and sand. The appellant asked for a towel to take a bath and explained that his car had broken down and while trying to put it in order his clothes got soiled. When the witness asked him about the boy accompanying the appellant the latter is alleged to have explained that he had stayed back with his friend. High Court found that the charge of murder could not be held to be proved on the basis of the evidence on record. The High Court was, in our opinion, correct in arriving at that conclusion. It is true that the tell-tale circumstances proved on the basis of the evidence on record give rise to a suspicion against the appellant but suspicion howsoever strong is not enough to justify conviction of the appellant for murder. The trial Court has, in our opinion, proceeded more on the basis that the appellant may have murdered the deceased-Abdul Mabood. In doing so the trial Court over looked the fact that there is a long distance between 'may have' and 'must have' which distance must be traversed by the prosecution by producing cogent and reliable evidence. No such evidence is unfortunately forthcoming in the instant case. The disappearance of deceased-Abdul Mabood is not explainable as sought to be argued before us by the prosecution only on the hypothesis that the appellant killed him near some canal in a manner that is not known or that the appellant disposed of his body in a fashion about which the prosecution has no evidence except a wild guess that the body may have been dumped into a canal from which it was never recovered. (Para 15)

The High Court was justified in setting aside the order passed by the trial Court and acquitting the appellant of the offence of murder under Section 302 IPC. The order passed by the High Court deserves to be affirmed giving to the appellant the benefit of doubt. (Para 20)

CASES REFERRED
1.Sunil Clifford Daniel (Dr.) v. State of Punjab [JT 2012 (8) SC 639] (Para 14)

2.Pannayar v. State of Tamil Nadu by Inspector of Police [JT 2009 (10) SC 461] (referred) (Para 14)

3.Sukhram v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2007 (10) SC 177] (Para 14)

4.State of Goa v. Sanjay Thakran and Anr. [JT 2007 (5) SC 146] (referred & relied) (Para 17)

5.Jaswant Gir v. State of Punjab [2005 (12) SCC 438] (referred & relied) (Para 18)

6.State of Karnataka v. M.V. Mahesh [2003 (3) SCC 353] (Para 11)

7.Bharat v. State of M.P. [JT 2003 (1) SC 635] (referred & relied) (Para 16)

8.Bodh Raj alias Bodha and Ors. v. State of Jammu and Kashmir [2002 (8) SCC 45] (referred & relied) (Para 17)

9.Lakshmi and Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh [JT 2002 (6) SC 392] (Para 12)

10.Mohibur Rahman and Anr. v. State of Assam [JT 2002 (6) SC 235] (referred & relied) (Para 16)

11.Godabarish Mishra  v. Kuntala Mishra and Another [JT 1996 (9) SC 708] (referred & relied) (Para 16)

12.Arjun Marik and Ors. v. State of Bihar [JT 1994 (2) SC 627] (referred & relied) (Para 16)

13.Rama Nand and Ors. v. State of Himachal Pradesh [1981 (1) SCC 511] (Para 9)

14.Ram Chandra & Ram Bharosey v. State of Uttar Pradesh [AIR 1957 SC 381] (Para 10)


T.S. THAKUR, J.

1. This appeal arises out of a judgment and order dated 27th August, 2008 passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital whereby Criminal Appeal No.298 of 2001 filed by the appellant has been partly allowed. The High Court has while setting aside the conviction and sentence awarded to the appellant under Section 302 IPC, upheld his conviction for offences punishable under Sections 171, 201 and 420 IPC and the sentence awarded by the trial Court for these offences. The High Court has further convicted the appellant for an offence punishable under Section 365 IPC and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years on that count.

2. The facts giving rise to the arrest and eventual conviction of the appellant have been set out by the High Court at length. We need not, therefore, recapitulate the same over again except to the extent it is absolutely necessary to do so for the disposal of this appeal. Suffice it to say that the appellant according to the prosecution dishonestly induced the complainant Dr. Mohd. Alam (P.W.2) at Dehradun to deliver his car bearing registration No.URM 2348 and a sum of Rs.15,000/- and at about 1.30 p.m. on the same day abducted Abdul Mabood, brother of the complainant with the intention to commit his murder. The prosecution case further is that sometime between 1.7.1987 and 2.7.1987, Abdul Mabood was murdered near a canal on Kairana Panipat Road in District Panipat and with a view to cause disappearance of any signs of the crime committed by him threw the dead body of Abdul Mabood in the Canal. A report for the alleged commission of offences under Sections 406, 419, 420 and 365 IPC was lodged by Dr. Mohd. Alam on 6.7.1987 at Police Station Dalanwala based on which Crime No.185/1987 was registered and the investigation undertaken by Muzaffar Ali - Sub-Inspector, examined as PW17 at the trial. In the course of investigation the said witness took the appellant into custody, recovered the car bearing Registration No.U.R.M.2348 from Panipat and effected seizure of some letters allegedly written by him. Further investigation of the case was then handed over to Mr. J.P. Sharma (P.W.18) who completed the same and submitted a charge sheet against the appellant for offences punishable under Sections 364, 302, 201, 420, 170 and 171 I.P.C.

3. The appellant was in due course committed to the Court of Sessions to face trial before the III Additional Sessions Judge, Dehradun who framed charges against the appellant to which the appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

4. At the trial Court the prosecution examined P.W. 1 Raees Ahmad, P.W.2 Dr. Mohd. Alam, also complainant in the case; P.W.3 Hari Om, P.W.4 Jiledar Singh, P.W.5 Hizfur Rahman the brother of Abdul Mabood-deceased; P.W.6 Anees Ahmad, P.W.7 Akash Garg, P.W.8 Badloo Ram, P.W.9 Jai Bhagwan, P.W.10 Ajit Chopra, and nine other witnesses including P.W.17 Muzaffar Ali and P.W.18 J. P. Sharma who concluded the investigation and P.W.19 Ramanand Pandey, another Scientific Officer of Forensic Laboratory, Agra. The appellant examined D.W.1 Yashveer Singh, his brother and D.W.2 Constable Om Prakash, in his defence.

5. Appreciation of evidence thus assembled at the trial led the trial Court to the conclusion that the appellant had committed offences punishable under the provisions with which he stood charged and accordingly sentenced him to life imprisonment for the offence of murder besides a fine of Rs.3,000/-. For the remaining offence he was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment ranging between two months to five years with the direction that all the sentences shall run concurrently.

6. Aggrieved by the judgment and order passed by the trial Court the appellant preferred an appeal to the High Court of Allahabad from where the same was transferred to the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in terms of Section 35 of the U.P. Re-organisation Act, 2000. The transferee High Court allowed the appeal but only in part and to the extent that the appellant was acquitted of the charge of murder while his conviction for offences under Sections 171, 201 and 420 was maintained. The High Court also altered the conviction from Section 364 IPC to Section 365 IPC and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years on that count. The present appeal assails the correctness of the said order of the High Court.

7. When this appeal came up for hearing before S.B. Sinha and Cyriac Joseph, JJ. on 24th October, 2008, this Court not only issued notice to the State in the appeal but also directed notice to the appellant to show cause why the order passed by the High Court acquitting the appellant under Section 302 may not be set aside. At this stage the appellant made a prayer for withdrawal of the SLP filed by him against his conviction which prayer was declined by this Court by order dated 5th January, 2009 on the ground that the Court had issued a show cause notice for reversal of the appellant's acquittal under Section 302 IPC.

8. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length who have taken us through the evidence on record. The only question that was argued before us with some amount of seriousness on both sides was whether the High Court was justified in acquitting the appellant of the charge of murder held proved against him by the trial Court. There was no attempt made by the counsel for the appellant to question the correctness of the findings recorded by the trial Court in so far as the commission of offences punishable under other provisions of the IPC were concerned. As seen above, the appellant had sought withdrawal of the SLP which implied that he did not question the correctness of the sentence recorded by the High Court in so far as other offences were concerned. That prayer was rejected which effectively kept the SLP alive, but no serious attempt was made to pursue the challenge against the order passed by the High Court in so far as the conviction recorded by the said Court under other offences was concerned. We are not in that view of the matter called upon to examine the correctness of the conviction of the appellant for other offences. Even otherwise the findings recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court are in our opinion supported by evidence in so far as commission of other offences are concerned. There is no miscarriage of justice in the appreciation of the evidence or recording of those finding to call for our interference.

9. Coming next to the question whether the prosecution has brought home the charge of murder levelled against the appellant, we must at the outset point out that the case is entirely based on circumstantial evidence. No direct evidence has been adduced to prove that Abdul Mabood, whose corpus delicti has not been recovered, was done to death, nor any evidence adduced to show where and when the same was disposed of by the appellant assuming that he had committed the crime alleged against him. The legal position regarding production of corpus delicti is well settled by a long line of decisions of this Court. We may briefly refer to some of those cases. In Rama Nand and Ors. v. State of Himachal Pradesh [1981 (1) SCC 511], this Court summed up the legal position on the subject as:

"...........In other words, we would take it that the corpus delicti, i.e., the dead-body of the victim was not found in this case. But even on that assumption, the question remains whether the other circumstances established on record were sufficient to lead to the conclusion that within all human probability, she had been murdered by Rama Nand appellant? It is true that one of the essential ingredients of the offence of culpable homicide required to be proved by the prosecution is that the accused caused the death" of the person alleged to have been killed.

28. This means that before seeking to prove that the accused is the perpetrator of the murder, it must be established that homicidal death has been caused. Ordinarily, the recovery of the dead-body of the victim or a vital part of it, bearing marks of violence, is sufficient proof of homicidal death of the victim. There was a time when under the old English Law, the finding of the body of the deceased was held to be essential before a person was convicted of committing his culpable homicide.

"I would never convict", said Sir Mathew Hale, "a person of murder or manslaughter unless the fact were proved to be done, or at least the body was found dead". This was merely a rule of caution, and not of law. But in those times when execution was the only punishment for murder, the need for adhering to this cautionary rule was greater. Discovery of the dead-body of the victim bearing physical evidence of violence, has never been considered as the only mode of proving the corpus delicti in murder. Indeed, very many cases are of such a nature where the discovery of the dead-body is impossible. A blind adherence to this old "body" doctrine would open the door wide open for many a heinous murderer to escape with impunity simply because they were cunning and clever enough to destroy the body of their victim. In the context of our law, Sir Hale's enunciation has to be interpreted no more than emphasising that where the dead-body of the victim in a murder case is not found, other cogent and satisfactory proof of the homicidal death of the victim must be adduced by the prosecution. Such proof may be by the direct ocular account of an eye-witness, or by circumstantial evidence, or by both. But where the fact of corpus delicti, i.e. 'homicidal death' is sought to be established by circumstantial evidence alone, the circumstances must be of a clinching and definitive character unerringly leading to the inference that the victim concerned has met a homicidal death. Even so, this principle of caution cannot be pushed too far as requiring absolute proof. Perfect proof is seldom to be had in this imperfect world, and absolute certainty is a myth. That is why under Section 3, Evidence Act, a fact is said to be "proved", if the Court considering the matters before it, considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists. The corpus delicti or the fact of homicidal death, therefore, can be proved by telling and inculpating circumstances which definitely lead to the conclusion that within all human probability, the victim has been murdered by the accused concerned...."

(emphasis supplied)

10. To the same effect is the decision in Ram Chandra & Ram Bharosey v. State of Uttar Pradesh [AIR 1957 SC 381], where this Court said:

"It is true that in law a conviction for an offence does not necessarily depend upon the corpus delicti being found. There may be reliable evidence, direct or circumstantial, of the commission of the murder though the corpus delicti are not traceable."

11. Reference may also be made to State of Karnataka v. M.V. Mahesh [2003 (3) SCC 353] where this Court observed:

"It is no doubt true that even in the absence of the corpus delicti it is possible to establish in an appropriate case commission of murder on appropriate material being made available to the court. In this case no such material is made available to the court."

12. In Lakshmi and Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh [JT 2002 (6) SC 392 : 2002 (7) SCC 198] the legal position was reiterated thus:

"16. Undoubtedly, the identification of the body, cause of death and recovery of weapon with which the injury may have been inflicted on the deceased are some of the important factors to be established by the prosecution in an ordinary given case to bring home the charge of offence under Section 302 I.P.C. This, however, is not an inflexible rule. It cannot be held as a general and broad proposition of law that where these aspects are not established, it would be fatal to the case of the prosecution and in all cases and eventualities, it ought to result in the acquittal of those who may be charged with the offence of murder. It would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. A charge of murder may stand established against an accused even in absence of identification of the body and cause the death."

13. In the absence of corpus delicti what the court looks for is clinching evidence that proves that the victim has been done to death. If the prosecution is successful in providing cogent and satisfactory proof of the victim having met a homicidal death, absence of corpus delicti will not by itself be fatal to a charge of murder. Failure of the prosecution to assemble such evidence will, however, result in failure of the most essential requirement in a case involving a charge of murder. That is precisely the position in the case at hand. There is no evidence either direct or circumstantial about Abdul Mabood having met a homicidal death. The charge of murder levelled against the appellant, therefore, rests on a rather tenuous ground of the two having been last seen together to which aspect we shall presently advert when we examine whether the two being last seen together is proved as a circumstance and can support a charge of murder.

14. The second aspect to which we must straightaway refer is the absence of any motive for the appellant to commit the alleged murder of Abdul Mabood. It is not the case of the prosecution that there existed any enmity between Abdul Mabood and the appellant nor is there any evidence to prove any such enmity. All that was suggested by learned counsel appearing for the State was that the appellant got rid of Abdul Mabood by killing him because he intended to take away the car which the complainant-Dr. Mohd. Alam had given to him. That argument has not impressed us. If the motive behind the alleged murder was to somehow take away the car, it was not necessary for the appellant to kill the deceased for the car could be taken away even without physically harming Abdul Mabood. It was not as though Abdul Mabood was driving the car and was in control thereof so that without removing him from the scene it was difficult for the appellant to succeed in his design. The prosecution case on the contrary is that the appellant had induced the complainant to part with the car and a sum of Rs.15,000/-. The appellant has been rightly convicted for that fraudulent act which conviction we have affirmed. Such being the position, the car was already in the possession and control of the appellant and all that he was required to do was to drop Abdul Mabood at any place en route to take away the car which he had ample opportunity to do during all the time the two were together while visiting different places. Suffice it to say that the motive for the alleged murder is as weak as it sounds illogical to us. It is fairly well-settled that while motive does not have a major role to play in cases based on eye-witness account of the incident, it assumes importance in cases that rest entirely on circumstantial evidence. [See Sukhram v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2007 (10) SC 177 : 2007 (7) SCC 502], Sunil Clifford Daniel (Dr.) v. State of Punjab [JT 2012 (8) SC 639 : 2012 (8) Scale 670], Pannayar v. State of Tamil Nadu by Inspector of Police [JT 2009 (10) SC 461 : 2009 (9) SCC 152]. Absence of strong motive in the present case, therefore, is something that cannot be lightly brushed aside.

15. Coming then to the circumstances which according to the prosecution prove the charge of murder against the appellant, all that we have is that the appellant and Abdul Mabood, the deceased, had left in a car bearing registration No.URM 2348 from No.1, Circular Road, Police Station Dalanwala, Dehradun and that on 2nd July, 1986 the appellant had gone to the house of one Akash Garg P.W.7 accompanied by a boy whom the witness identified as the deceased-Abdul Mabood. The deposition of PW8 Badlu Ram, posted as a Peon at Naval Cinema, Panipat, is also to the same effect. According to the said witness the appellant had gone to the cinema accompanied by a boy between 20-22 years of age whom he recognised as the alleged deceased-Abdul Mabood on the basis of a photograph shown to him at the trial. The only other evidence which has any relevance to the circumstances that led to the disappearance of Abdul Mabood is the deposition of Tejveer Singh P.W.11, resident of Budha Kheri, Panipat, a businessman by occupation, who claims to have seen the appellant with Abdul Mabood when the two visited his farm. The boy was identified by 'T' PW 11by reference to a photograph shown to him as the alleged deceased-Abdul Mabood. According to the witness the appellant had gone away with his companion boy and when he returned at night he was all alone. He also appeared troubled and his clothes were stained with dust and sand. The appellant asked for a towel to take a bath and explained that his car had broken down and while trying to put it in order his clothes got soiled. When the witness asked him about the boy accompanying the appellant the latter is alleged to have explained that he had stayed back with his friend. The deposition of PW10 Ajit Chopra who is also a resident of Panipat proved that the appellant had visited his residence in the first week of July, 1987 and had left his car at Naval Talkies which was then brought to his factory by their driver Jai Bhagwan examined as PW9. The trial Court on the basis of the above evidence held that the deceased-Abdul Mabood had been taken by the appellant to Panipat and disposed of by him on the basis that the two were last seen together. The trial Court had, however, found no motive or evidence for the alleged murder of the deceased- Abdul Mabood. The High Court took a contrary view and found that the charge of murder could not be held to be proved on the basis of the evidence on record. The High Court was, in our opinion, correct in arriving at that conclusion. It is true that the tell-tale circumstances proved on the basis of the evidence on record give rise to a suspicion against the appellant but suspicion howsoever strong is not enough to justify conviction of the appellant for murder. The trial Court has, in our opinion, proceeded more on the basis that the appellant may have murdered the deceased-Abdul Mabood. In doing so the trial Court over looked the fact that there is a long distance between 'may have' and 'must have' which distance must be traversed by the prosecution by producing cogent and reliable evidence. No such evidence is unfortunately forthcoming in the instant case. The legal position on the subject is well settled and does not require any reiteration. The decisions of this Court have on numerous occasions laid down the requirements that must be satisfied in cases resting on circumstantial evidence. The essence of the said requirement is that not only should the circumstances sought to be proved against the accused be established beyond a reasonable doubt but also that such circumstances form so complete a chain as leaves no option for the Court except to hold that the accused is guilty of the offences with which he is charged. The disappearance of deceased-Abdul Mabood in the present case is not explainable as sought to be argued before us by the prosecution only on the hypothesis that the appellant killed him near some canal in a manner that is not known or that the appellant disposed of his body in a fashion about which the prosecution has no evidence except a wild guess that the body may have been dumped into a canal from which it was never recovered.

16. In Mohibur Rahman and Anr. v. State of Assam [JT 2002 (6) SC 235 : 2002 (6) SCC 715], this Court held that the circumstance of last seen does not by itself necessarily lead to the inference that it was the accused who committed the crime. It depends upon the facts of each case. There may however be cases where, on account of close proximity of place and time between the event of the accused having been last seen with the deceased and the factum of death, a rational mind may be persuaded to reach an irresistible conclusion that either the accused should explain how and in what circumstances the victim suffered the death or should own the liability for the homicide. Similarly in Arjun Marik and Ors. v. State of Bihar [JT 1994 (2) SC 627 : 1994 (Suppl. 2) SCC 372], this Court reiterated that the solitary circumstance of the accused and victim being last seen will not complete the chain of circumstances for the Court to record a finding that it is consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. No conviction on that basis alone can, therefore, be founded. So also in Godabarish Mishra  v. Kuntala Mishra and Another [JT 1996 (9) SC 708 : 1996 (11) SCC 264], this Court declared that the theory of last seen together is not of universal application and may not always be sufficient to sustain a conviction unless supported by other links in the chain of circumstances. In Bharat v. State of M.P. [JT 2003 (1) SC 635 : 2003 (3) SCC 106]; two circumstances on the basis whereof the appellant had been convicted were (i) the appellant having been last seen with the deceased and (ii) Recovery of ornaments made at his instance. This Court held:

"........Mere non-explanation cannot lead to the proof of guilt against the appellant. The prosecution has to prove its case against the appellant beyond reasonable doubt. The chain of circumstances, in our opinion, is not complete so as to sustain the conviction of the appellant....."

17. We may also refer to State of Goa v. Sanjay Thakran and Anr. [JT 2007 (5) SC 146 : 2007 (3) SCC 755] where this Court held that in the absence of any other corroborative piece of evidence to complete the chain of circumstances it is not possible to fasten the guilt on the accused on the solitary circumstance of the two being seen together. Reference may also be made to Bodh Raj alias Bodha and Ors. v. State of Jammu and Kashmir [2002 (8) SCC 45] where this Court held:

"The last-seen theory comes into play where the time-gap between the point of time when the accused and the deceased were seen last alive and when the deceased is found dead is so small that possibility of any person other than the accused being the author of the crime becomes impossible. It would be difficult in some cases to positively establish that the deceased was last seen with the accused when there is a long gap and possibility of other persons coming in between exists. In the absence of any other positive evidence to conclude that the accused and the deceased were last seen together, it would be hazardous to come to a conclusion of guilt in those cases...."

18. Finally in Jaswant Gir v. State of Punjab [2005 (12) SCC 438], this Court held that it is not possible to convict Appellant solely on basis of 'last seen' evidence in the absence of any other links in the chain of circumstantial evidence, the Court gave benefit of doubt to accused persons.

19. Abdul Mabood-deceased was a young, physically stout boy aged 20-22 years. In the absence of any suggestion as to how and where he was done to death it is difficult to infer anything incriminating against the appellant except a strong suspicion when he returned at night to the farm of Tajveer Singh with soiled clothes. The explanation given by the appellant for his clothes getting soiled can also not said to be so absurd that one could straightway reject and count the same as an incriminating circumstance so conclusive in nature that the Court could presume that they were explainable only on the hypothesis that the appellant had committed the crime alleged against him.

20. Suffice it to say that even if we take the most charitable liberal view in favour of the prosecution, all that we get is a suspicion against the appellant and no more. The High Court was in that view justified in setting aside the order passed by the trial Court and acquitting the appellant of the offence of murder under Section 302 IPC. The order passed by the High Court deserves to be affirmed giving to the appellant the benefit of doubt. We accordingly dismiss the appeal filed by the appellant and discharge the notice of show-cause issued to him.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAW
Indian Penal Code, 1860
Sections  302, 307, 450 - Conviction for murder of  real  brother  and his family members in brutal manner without any provocation  when  they were sleeping - Death Sentence - Held such brutal  and  merciless murders of absolutely innocent persons when there was  no  occasion to come in conflict and in a cool and  calculative  manner shocks conscience of socieÂty - Court must award deterrent  punishment  conforming to gravity of offence - Crime  falls  in  the category of rarest of rare cases for which extreme  penalty  of death is fully justified - No interference.

Held

After  giving  our anxious consideration to  the  facts  and circumstances  of  the case, it appears to us that  for  deciding just  and appropriate sentence to be awarded for an offence,  the aggravating  and mitigating factors and circumstances in which  a crime  has  been  committed are to be delicately  balanced  in  a dispassionate  manner.  Such act of balancing is indeed a  difficult  task.  It has been very aptly indicated in  Dennis  Lounde Mcgautha  v. State of California (402) U.S. 183 L. Ed.  II  711) that  no  formula of a full proof nature is possible  that  would provide  a reasonable criterion in determining a just and  appropriate  punishment in the infinite variety of circumstances  that may affect the gravity of the crime of murder.  In the absence of any full proof formula which may provide any basis for reasonable criteria to correctly assess various circumstances germane to the consideration  of gravity of crime of murder,  the  discretionary judgment in the facts of each case, is the only way in which such judgment may be equitably distinguished.  

In Shanker  v.  State of Tamil Nadu (1994 (4) SCC 478), this Court  has indicated that the choice as to which one of  the  two punishments  provided for murder is a proper one in a given  case will  depend upon the particular circumstances of that  case  and the Court has to exercise its discretion  judicially and on well-recognised  principles  after  balancing all  the  mitigating  or aggravating circumstances of the case. 

In  Jashubha  Bharat Singh and others  v. State  of  Gujarat (1994  (4) SCC 353), it has been held by this Court that  in  the matter  of death sentence, the Courts are required to answer  new challenges  and would the sentencing system to meet  these  challenges.  The object should be to protect the society and to deter the  criminal in achieving the avowed object of law  by  imposing appropriate  sentence.  It  is expected that  the  courts  would operate  the sentencing system as to impose such  sentence  which reflects the conscience of the Society and the sentencing process has to be stern where it should be.  

In  Dhananjoy Chatterjee  v. State of West Bengal (1994  (2) SCC 220), this Court has observed that shockingly large number of criminals  go  unpunished  thereby  increasing,  encouraging  the criminals and in the ultimate making, justice suffer by weakening the system's credibility.  The imposition of appropriate  punishment  is the manner in which the Court responds to the  society's cry  for  justice  against the criminal.  Justice  demands  that courts  should impose punishment befitting the crime so that  the courts  reflect public abhorrence of the crime.  The  Court  must not  only  keep in view the right of the criminal  but  also  the rights  of the victim of the crime and the society at last  while considering the imposition of appropriate punishment.  

Similar view has also been expressed in Ravji @ Ram  Chandra  v. State of Rajasthan (JT 1995 (8) SC 520).  It has been held  in the said case that it is the nature and gravity of the crime  but not  the criminal, which are germane for consideration of  appropriate punishment in a criminal trial.  The Court will be failing in its duty if appropriate punishment is not awarded for a  crime which  has been committed not only against the individual  victim but  also  against the society to which the criminal  and  victim belong.  The  punishment to be awarded for a crime must  not  be irrelevant  but it should conform to and be consistent  with  the atrocity and brutality with which the crime has been perpetrated, the  enormity  of the crime warranting public abhorrence  and  it should  'respond  to the society's cry for  justice  against  the criminal.  If for extremely heinous crime of murder  perpetrated in  a very brutal manner without any provocation, most  deterrent punishment  is not given, the case of deterrent  punishment  will lose its relevance.  

In the instant case, there is absence of any  provocation.  There is  no  material on record from which it can be  reasonably  held that  the accused had any occasion to reasonably  feel  aggrieved for  any unjust and improper conduct on the part of the  deceased brother.  It  has transpired from evidence  adduced  that  joint lands  had  been partitioned long back amongst the  brothers  and each  of the brothers including the deceased and the accused  had been possessing his respective allotted lands. From the  evidence it  transpires that all the three brothers had been  residing  in separate portions within their residential compound or 'Ahata'. A  few  days  before  the  incident,  there was a quarrel  between the  accused and the deceased when the accused intended to put  a barbed fencing on a portion of their residential complex but  the deceased objected to such course of action.  Such incident cannot be reasonably held to be a cause for being temperamentally  upset and for entertaining so much wrath and spirit of vengeance as may impel  a man of normal composure and frame of mind to run  amock and  perpetrate ghastly murders of such magnitude.  There  is  no evidence to indicate that in view of such quarrel happening a few days  prior  to  the incident there had been  any  aftermath  and further  dispute  and  resentment between the  deceased  and  the accused either immediately before or even proximately before  the incident  of  murders and attempts to commit murders.  From  the evidence  adduced, it is clearly revealed that the accused, in  a cool and calculated manner intended to wipe out the entire family of his brother.  In that end in view, he selected the most opportune  moment,  namely, dead of night when his brother  and  other members  of his family would remain asleep so that they would  be absolutely  helpless and not capable to give any defence to  save themselves.  In order to ensure death, the accused chose to  cut vital  part  of  the body, namely, the neck by  a  sharp  cutting weapon  (kassi)  when his victims were  asleep.  He,  therefore, succeeded  in  murdering his brother Raji Ram and his  two  minor sons by cutting their necks without any resistance from them.  He did not even spare the poor old aunt and brutally murdered her by cutting  her neck when she was asleep. In order to wipe  out  the whole  family  of  his brother, the accused  also  attempted  to murder  the brother's wife and the brother's daughter  when  they were also asleep. It has been indicated by the learned Additional Sessions  Judge that the accused was in full senses and had  committed  the murders of four close relations one after  the  other and  also  attempted to commit murder of his brother's  wife  and daughter  in a cool and calculated manner.  He did not even  feel remorsed  and  being  quite alive to the enormity  of  the  crime committed by him he escaped from the place of occurrence.  

The  murders had been committed very brutally and mercilessly  of absolutely  innocent persons, namely, the Bua and two minor  sons of  his brother with whom there was no occasion to come  in  conflict and to entertain any grudge or ill feeling.  Even if it  is assumed  that there was still some property dispute  between  the brothers despite sorting out of such dispute at the  intervention of  the Sarpanch, for such common place property dispute  between brothers particularly when the accused was not dispossessed  from the possession and enjoyment of his demarcated landed property by the  deceased  brother,  it cannot be reasonably  held  that  the accused had a genuine cause to feel aggrieved for injustice meted out  to him in the hands of his deceased brother which may  impel him  to  cause the murder of his brother.  In  any  event,  there could not be any cause to take a decision to wipe out the  entire family  of the brother in a very cruel manner when  being  asleep they were absolutely helpless.  The members of the family of  his brother  were  absolutely  innocent and two  of  them  were  even minors.  Such murders and attempt to commit murders in a cool and calculated  manner without provocation cannot but shock the  conscience  of the society which must abhor such heinous crime  committed  on helpless innocent persons.  Punishment must  also  respond  to  the society's cry for justice  against  the  criminal.  While considering the punishment to be given to the accused,  the Court should be alive not only to the right of the criminal to be awarded  just and fair punishment by administering  justice  tempered  with  such mercy as the criminal may justly  deserve,  but also  to the rights of the victims of the crime to have  the  assailant  appropriately  punished  and  the  society's  reasonable expectation from the court for the appropriate deterrent  punishment conforming to the gravity of the offence and consistent with the  public  abhorrence for the heinous crime  committed  by  the accused.  In the facts and circumstances of the case, we are  of the  view, that the crime committed by the accused falls  in  the category  of  rarest of rare cases for which extreme  penalty  of death  is  fully  justified.  We, therefore, find  no  reason  to  interfere  with the sentence of death awarded against the appellant since confirmed by the High Court. [Paras 18, 19, 20 , 21, 22, 23, 24]

CASES REFERRED
1. Ravji @ Ram Chandra v. State of Rajasthan [JT 1995 (8) SC 520] 

2. Anshad and others v. State of Karnataka [JT 1994 (3) SC 324] (Para 14) 

3. Shanker v. State of Tamil Nadu [JT 1994 (3) SC 54] (Para 19) 

4. Jashubha Bharat Singh and others v. State of Gujarat [JT 1994 (3) SC 250] (Para 20) 

5. Dhananjoy Chatterjee v. State of West Bengal [JT 1994 (1) SC 33] (Para 21) 

6. Shashi Nayar v. Union of India and others [1992 SCC (Crl.) 24] (Para 12) 

7. Bachan Singh v. State [1980 (2) SCC 684] (Para 12) 

8. Shiv Mohan Singh v. State [AIR 1977 (SC) 949] (Para 12) 

9. Jagmohan Singh v. State of U.P. [AIR 1973 (SC) 947] (Para 12) 

10. Dennis Lounde Mcgautha v. State of California (402) U.S. [183 L. Ed. II 711] (Para 18)

G.N. RAY, J.

1.  Leave granted.

2.  The  appellant  Surja Ram was convicted  by  the  learned  Additional  Sessions Judge, Hanumangarh in Sessions Trial No.  28 of  1991 for the offence under Section 302 IPC for murdering  his real  brother Raji Ram,  Raji Ram's two sons  Naresh  and  Ramesh  and  Niko  Bai their Bua, and  for an offence under  Section  307  IPC  for attempting  to  murder Sudesh, the daughter of Raji  Ram and  Phoola  Devi  the  wife of Raji Ram and also  for  offence under  Section 450 IPC for  committing  house  trespass in  order to  commit  offence punishable with imprisonment  for life.  The learned Additional Sessions Judge awarded death sentence  against the  said accused Surja Ram  for  the  offence  of  murder.  He  was sentenced  to  suffer  imprisonment  for  life  and  a  fine  of  Rs.2,000/-, in default of payment of fine, further  rigorous imprisonment  for  three  months  for  the  offence under Section 307 IPC and he was also sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment  for  ten years  and  fine  of  Rs.1,000/-, in default of  payment of  fine, to suffer further rigorous imprisonment for  one  month for the offence under Section 450 IPC. 

3.  Against  such  convictions  and  sentences,  the  accused Surja Ram preferred D.B. Criminal Appeal No. 265 and 266 of  1995 before  the Rajasthan High Court (Jodhpur Bench).  The  said  appeals  were heard along with D.B. Criminal Murder Reference  No.1 of  1995 by the Rajasthan High Court and by the  impugned  common judgment  dated January 18, 1996, the High Court  dismissed  both the  appeals preferred  by  the  accused  Surja  Ram  and  confirmed  the death sentence passed against him.  

4.  Surja  Ram filed S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 744 of  1996  through  a learned counsel against his convictions and sentences before this Court. He also sent another special  leave petition from Jail  to the Registry of this Court which has been numbered as D.No.  1007 of 1996.  His special leave petition was dismissed by this  Court after hearing the learned counsel so far as the order of  convictions  passed against the said accused is concerned  but  notice  was issued to the State of Rajasthan limited only on the question of sentences to be passed against the accused for his convictions for  the offences aforesaid. 

5.  Mr.  Rajib Dutt, the learned counsel appearing for  the  accused appellant Raji Ram  has submitted that it is not a fit case calling  for awarding extreme penalty of death  sentence  because sufficient  grounds  warranting such extreme penalty  by  holding it as one of the rarest of rare cases are not present.  Mr.  Dutt has submitted that certain facts, relevant for the  consideration of  appropriate  punishment  to be awarded  against  the  accused appellant, should be noted.

6.  The accused appellant and his two brothers Dalip Ram and the deceased  Raji  Ram had been living  in one compound  (Ahata)  in their respective residential unit.  The accused appellant used to reside  in  the middle portion of the said compound and  the  deceased Raji Ram and Dalip Ram used to reside respectively on  the northern and southern side of the said compound.  The parents  of the accused and his brothers were residing in Punjab.  There  had been  partition of joint property amongst the brothers.  On  such partition the accused and Dalip Ram each got 13 killa of land and the deceased Raji Ram got 14 killa. 

7.  There was some land  dispute amongst the brothers about 6 to 7  months prior  to the said incident of murder but such  dispute is stated to have been sorted out at the intervention of Sarpanch Chandra Pal.

8.  About  5  or 6 days prior to the incident, the  accused  expressed the desire to erect wire fencing in the compound but  the deceased Raji Ram protested against such proposal of the accused.  

9.  The  prosecution case as proved by the evidences adduced  in the  trial,  is that on August 7, 1990 at about  9.00  P.M.,  the members  of  the family of the deceased Raji  Ram  retired  after taking  their  dinner.  The informant  Dalip Ram,  who  is  the  other  brother of the deceased and  the wife of  Dalip  Ram  were sleeping  in their courtyard.  Raji Ram and his two  sons  Naresh and  Ramesh  were sleeping in the outer room of  his  residential unit.  Raji Ram's wife Phoola Devi, her daughter Sudesh and  Raji Ram's father's sister Niko  Bai  were  sleeping  in  their courtyard.  In the courtyard of Surja Ram the wife  of  the  accused Imarti was also sleeping.  After taking meal, the appellant  went out  of  the house.  At about 12.30 A.M.,  Dalip  Ram  heard  the cries of Sudesh.  When he came out, he saw in the light that  the accused  Surja Ram was standing  with  a  kassi  in his hand  and was  assaulting  Sudesh.  Dalip Ram and the wife of  the  accused Imarti  challenged the accused and the accused had run away.  It  has  been proved that Sudesh had suffered severe injuries on  her neck and she fell down in the courtyard and Niko and Phoola  were also  found  lying seriously injured.  Niko was,  however,  found dead and Phoola was gasping for life.  When Dalip Ram went inside the room, he found that Raji Ram and his son Naresh  were  lying  dead  and the other son Ramesh though alive, was  critically  injured.  The  said  Ramesh, however, died shortly thereafter  and Sudesh and Phoola  were  taken  in  a  jeep and admitted  in  the  hospital  at  Sangaria.  On being  treated  in  the  hospital  both  of them survived.  

10.  In  awarding  the  sentence  of  death against  the  accused-appellant, the learned Additional Sessions Judge noted that :

a)  The  accused had committed extremely barbaric  and  heinous crime  of  causing murder of four persons and also  attempted  to murder the other two who, though seriously injured, providentially survived.  

(b)  The accused committed murder of his own real  brother,  two minor  sons of his said brother and also his Bua.  Although  the accused  also attempted to kill the daughter  and  the  wife  of his brother, they, being seriously injured, luckily survived.  

(c)  The  accused committed the murder of  the  said persons  and also  attempted  to murder the other two close  relations  while  all  the  said victims were defenseless  as they were asleep then and  therefore, had no opportunity to save themselves  or  resist the attack.  

(d)  The  accused  attempted  to  kill  Phoola his brother's wife by  cutting her neck and being critically injured,  she  remained unconscious  for about 15 days and  hovered  between  life  and  death  but  luckily  survived.  Attempt was also made  to  kill  the  daughter of his brother by cutting her neck with  kassi  but she also luckily survived.  

(e)  The  intention  of  the accused was only to murder all  the said persons because he inflicted injuries on the neck of all the said persons with a sharp cutting weapon (kassi).  

(f)  The accused ensured that no male member in the family of his brother  Raji Ram was alive.  As a matter of fact,  he  attempted  to  wipe  out  the whole family of  Raji  Ram but the widow  and the  daughter  of  Raji Ram survived even  though  they  suffered serious  injuries on their necks by the kassi blows inflicted  by the accused.  

(g)  There  was  no  instigation  or provocation  for causing the said  murders  of four  very close relations  and  attempting  to cause murders of the other two persons.  

(h)  For some land dispute which was settled six  months  before and the dispute and altercation over a small incident of  putting the  barbed  wire in the compound of  the  residential  complex which  had also taken place 2 to 3 days before the incident,  the accused  in  a cool and calculated manner attacked all  the  said persons  when they were sleeping in their house and were  utterly helpless in resisting attacks made on them.  

(i)  The  previous and the subsequent conduct  of  the  accused clearly revealed that he was mentally alert for which he selected  the  opportune  moment  to commit the said  murders  when  the victims  were asleep and after committing the crime escaped  from the scene of crime.  

(j)  There was complete absence of any feeling of remorse of  the accused.  

11.  The  learned Additional Sessions Judge after indicating  the aforesaid  aggravating  factors in the commission of  the  crime came  to  the finding that there was absence  of  any  mitigating  factor  in  favour  of the accused and the  heinous  act  of  murder  of four persons including an old aunt and two minor  sons of  his real brother  and attempting also to kill  his  brother's wife  and her daughter in a most cool  and calculated  manner  by ensuring  that  none  of the victim could  offer  any  resistance because they were asleep at the time  of  being attacked, constituted the offence committed by the accused as one  of  the rarest of rare cases for which the extreme penalty of death was warranted.  

12.  The  learned Judge held that the death sentence per se  was not unconstitutional as  has been held by this Court in  Jagmohan Singh  v. State of U.P. (AIR) 1973 SC 947), Shiv Mohan  Singh  v.  State  (AIR 1977 SC 949), Bachan Singh  v.  State (1980 (2)  SCC 684), Shashi Nayar v. Union of India and others (1992 SCC  (Crl.) 24).  

13.  Mr.Dutta, the  learned  counsel  for  the  accused-appellant  has  submitted  that  though the appellant has committed  a  very serious crime by killing his own brother, his two minor sons  and his Bua when they were asleep and he also attempted  to kill  his brother's wife and brother's daughter, the appellant  did not act  with cruelty or  in  a  barbaric  manner and also did not torture anyone  of them before  committing  the murder or  attempting  to cause  murder.  The learned counsel has submitted that though  it is  extremely unfortunate that the appellant committed  the  said ghastly  murders of his  brother and his two minor sons  and  the old aunt and also attempted to kill brother's wife and  daughter, it  should  be kept in mind that the appellant  felt  deeply  aggrieved against the conduct of his brother Raji Ram on account of dispute  with him in land matter and the recent quarrel which  he had  with  the deceased for  not  allowing the appellant  to  put fencing  as desired by him, in the compound of their  residential complex.  The  appellant unfortunately fell victim to  his  deep seeded ill feeling towards his brother and members of the  family of  the said brother and lost his normal frame of mind for  which he  could not restrain himself and being mad with rage and  being actuated by an urge for vengeance, murdered the said persons  and attempted to murder the other two.  

14.  The learned counsel for the appellant has further  submitted that life once put to  end can  never  be  brought  back.  It is, therefore,  essentially  necessary to give  a  very  careful  and serious  consideration  as to whether such  extreme  penalty  of  death  which  will  put  an  end of the life  of  the  accused, should be awarded in a case or not.  The learned counsel has also submitted  that the number of persons murdered though a  relevant consideration  in  weighing  the gravity of a crime is  not  the only  consideration  in  selecting  the  extreme  penalty  for  murder and unless the crime perpetrated by an accused can  safely be  placed in the category of rarest of rare cases,  the  extreme penalty  of  death  should not be awarded.  In  support  of  such contention,  the  learned  counsel  for  the  appellant  has  referred  to a decision of this Court in Anshad  and  others  v.  State  of Karnataka (1994 (4) SCC 381).

15.  The learned counsel for the appellants was further submitted that  the facts and circumstances of the case do not reveal  the  that  the accused was a maniac or otherwise blood-thirsty with  a high  degree  of propensity to commit murder of innocent persons. On  the  contrary, the accused is a poor agriculturist  who  was  not booked for any crime. Unfortunately, for the said land  dispute  and  the  quarrel with the  deceased  in  connection  with  putting  of a barbed fence in  the domestic house, the  appellant suddenly  became very much engaged and lost  the  normal  frame  of mind and control over his passions. In such uncontrolled frame of mind, be decided to murder  his brother and his family members so  as to out an end of any dispute with them for ever. Such  act though very heinous and extremely lamentable, cannot be  categorised as a rarest of rare cases. The learned counsel has submitted that  the  accused attacked each of the victim with a sharp  cutting instrument 'kassi' and inflicted  injuries  on  the neck  of each  of the  victim so that the death could be  hastened.  There was  no tendency on his part to subject any of the victim to  any cruel treatment or torture before killing them. In the  aforesaid circumstances, the learned Additional Sessions Judge and the High Court  should  not  appellant. The appellant should  be  given  a chance to reform himself in jail and recent for his crime  during long span of imprisonment for  life and thereafter to be a useful member  in  the society, he has, therefore, submitted  that  the death  penalty  should be set  by commuting the sentence  to  the sentence of imprisonment for life.

16.  The  learned  counsel for the State,  however,  opposed  the submissions  of the learned counsel for the appellant that  crime committed  by the accused did not constitute a rarest  cases  for which  the  extreme penalty of death is warranted.  It  has  been submitted  by  the  learned counsel for the State  that  all  the brothers  had  specific share of the land on partition  of  joint property  and they have been enjoying their respective  share  of land. There is nothing on record to indicate that peaceful enjoyment of the land allotted to the share of the accused was  sought to  be interfered with by the deceased who was none else but  his real brother. On the contrary, it has been proved that there  was a  dispute between the brothers in respect of only one  killa  of partitioned land. Such dispute was also sorted out at the  intervention  of  the  Surpanch of the village  several  months  back. Hence, there was no just cause for nursing any aggrieved  feeling and sense of injustice meted out to him in the hands of the  said brother.  There was a minor dispute between the deceased and  the accused  5  to 6 days before the date of the  incident  when  the accused wanted to but a barbed fencing on portion of their  residential complex and the deceased protested against such intention of  the accused. In a domestic life. Such petty discord and  dissension  often happen. For such a petty discord, there cannot  be any  occasion for any man of normal composure to lose control  of his senses and to become so enraged as to commit murder of brother  and  his  two minor sons and an old aunt and  to  attempt  to murder  the brother's wife and daughter unless he is a person  of cruel  nature and absolutely mean minded. Even if it  is  assumed that  because of such dispute, the appellant had  felt  aggrieved and became enraged, the murders had not been committed immediately  after the occurrence when the accused might have lost  normal frame of mind. The incident of dispute in connection with putting of  fencing had taken place several days before the date of  commission of murders. It is quite evident that the accused did  not commit  said crime under a grave and sudden provocation and in  a fit  of emotional set back but being determined to wipe  out  the entire  family  of his brother, he selected  the  most  opportune moment  to commit the said ghastly murders at dead of night  when the  brother and the members of his family were fast  asleep  and were completely helpless to put up any defence.

17.  The learned counsel for the State has also submitted that if the  accused had occasion to feel aggrieved against  his  brother either  on  account of the land dispute, though in fact  no  such dispute  was then existing, or on account of resistance given  by the brother in not allowing the accused to put a fencing in their residential  complex,  there was no occasion for the  accused  to kill  two innocent minor sons of his brother who were  asleep  at the time of murder.  Similarly, there was no occasion to kill the old  aunt and also to attempt to kill the brother's wife and  the brother's  daughter  when they were also  asleep  and  completely defenceless.  The brother's wife and daughter were given  serious injuries  by the sharp cutting instrument on their necks  and  it was due to extreme good luck that they ultimately survived  after prolonged medical treatment in the hospital.  The learned counsel for the State has submitted that such act of murders and  attempt to  murder  had  not been committed on account of  any  grave  or sudden provocation but the same had been committed in a cool  and calculated  manner with clear and definite intention to wipe  out each  member of the family of his real brother.  Such act on  the part  of the accused has been rightly categorised by the  learned Additional  Sessions Judge and also by the High Court as  one  of the  rarest  of rare cases of murder.  The  learned  counsel  has submitted  that the said act of extreme brutality  in  committing the  murder  of helpless innocent persons is bound to  shock  the conscience of the society and the cry of the society for  justice and just punishment to the criminal cannot be met by showing  any sympathy to the accused, when there is no real mitigating  factor in  favour of the accused.  He has, therefore, submitted that  no interference  is called for against the capital sentence  awarded against the accused.  

18.  After  giving  our anxious consideration to  the  facts  and circumstances  of  the case, it appears to us that  for  deciding just  and appropriate sentence to be awarded for an offence,  the aggravating  and mitigating factors and circumstances in which  a crime  has  been  committed are to be delicately  balanced  in  a dispassionate  manner.  Such act of balancing is indeed a  difficult  task.  It has been very aptly indicated in  Dennis  Lounde Mcgautha  v. State of California (402) U.S. 183 L. Ed.  II  711) that  no  formula of a full proof nature is possible  that  would provide  a reasonable criterion in determining a just and  appropriate  punishment in the infinite variety of circumstances  that may affect the gravity of the crime of murder.  In the absence of any full proof formula which may provide any basis for reasonable criteria to correctly assess various circumstances germane to the consideration  of gravity of crime of murder,  the  discretionary judgment in the facts of each case, is the only way in which such judgment may be equitably distinguished.  

19.  In Shanker  v.  State of Tamil Nadu (1994 (4) SCC 478), this Court  has indicated that the choice as to which one of  the  two punishments  provided for murder is a proper one in a given  case will  depend upon the particular circumstances of that  case  and the Court has to exercise its discretion  judicially and on well-recognised  principles  after  balancing all  the  mitigating  or aggravating circumstances of the case. 

20.  In  Jashubha  Bharat Singh and others  v. State  of  Gujarat (1994  (4) SCC 353), it has been held by this Court that  in  the matter  of death sentence, the Courts are required to answer  new challenges  and would the sentencing system to meet  these  challenges.  The object should be to protect the society and to deter the  criminal in achieving the avowed object of law  by  imposing appropriate  sentence.  It  is expected that  the  courts  would operate  the sentencing system as to impose such  sentence  which reflects the conscience of the Society and the sentencing process has to be stern where it should be.  

21.  In  Dhananjoy Chatterjee  v. State of West Bengal (1994  (2) SCC 220), this Court has observed that shockingly large number of criminals  go  unpunished  thereby  increasing,  encouraging  the criminals and in the ultimate making, justice suffer by weakening the system's credibility.  The imposition of appropriate  punishment  is the manner in which the Court responds to the  society's cry  for  justice  against the criminal.  Justice  demands  that courts  should impose punishment befitting the crime so that  the courts  reflect public abhorrence of the crime.  The  Court  must not  only  keep in view the right of the criminal  but  also  the rights  of the victim of the crime and the society at last  while considering the imposition of appropriate punishment.  

22.  Similar view has also been expressed in Ravji @ Ram  Chandra  v. State of Rajasthan (JT 1995 (8) SC 520).  It has been held  in the said case that it is the nature and gravity of the crime  but not  the criminal, which are germane for consideration of  appropriate punishment in a criminal trial.  The Court will be failing in its duty if appropriate punishment is not awarded for a  crime which  has been committed not only against the individual  victim but  also  against the society to which the criminal  and  victim belong.  The  punishment to be awarded for a crime must  not  be irrelevant  but it should conform to and be consistent  with  the atrocity and brutality with which the crime has been perpetrated, the  enormity  of the crime warranting public abhorrence  and  it should  'respond  to the society's cry for  justice  against  the criminal.  If for extremely heinous crime of murder  perpetrated in  a very brutal manner without any provocation, most  deterrent punishment  is not given, the case of deterrent  punishment  will lose its relevance.  

23.  In  the instant case, there is absence of any  provocation.  There  is no material on record from which it can  be  reasonably held  that  the accused had any occasion to reasonably  feel  aggrieved  for any unjust and improper conduct on the part  of  the deceased  brother.  It has transpired from evidence adduced  that joint  lands had been partitioned long back amongst the  brothers and  each of the brothers including the deceased and the  accused had been possessing his respective allotted lands.  There was  an occasion  for difference and dispute between the accused and  the deceased  in respect  of only one killa of land but such  dispute had  been sorted out at the intervention of the Sarpanch  of  the village  about  eight to ten months before the  incident.  After that  no fresh incident had taken place in recent past for  which there was any occasion for the accused to feel aggrieved concerning  his landed property.  From the evidence it  transpires  that all  the  three brothers had been residing in  separate  portions within  their  residential  compound or  'Ahata'.  A  few  days  before  the  incident,  there was a quarrel between the  accused and the deceased when the accused intended to put a barbed  fencing  on a portion of their residential complex but  the  deceased objected  to  such  course of action.  Such  incident  cannot  be reasonably held to be a cause for being temperamentally upset and for  entertaining  so much wrath and spirit of vengeance  as  may impel  a man of normal composure and frame of mind to run  amock and  perpetrate ghastly murders of such magnitude.  There  is  no evidence to indicate that in view of such quarrel happening a few days  prior  to  the incident there had been  any  aftermath  and further  dispute  and  resentment between the  deceased  and  the accused either immediately before or even proximately before  the incident  of  murders and attempts to commit murders.  From  the evidence  adduced, it is clearly revealed that the accused, in  a cool and calculated manner intended to wipe out the entire family of his brother.  In that end in view, he selected the most opportune  moment,  namely, dead of night when his brother  and  other members  of his family would remain asleep so that they would  be absolutely  helpless and not capable to give any defence to  save themselves.  In order to ensure death, the accused chose to  cut vital  part  of  the body, namely, the neck by  a  sharp  cutting weapon  (kassi)  when his victims were  asleep.  He,  therefore, succeeded  in  murdering his brother Raji Ram and his  two  minor sons by cutting their necks without any resistance from them.  He did not even spare the poor old aunt and brutally murdered her by cutting  her neck when she was asleep. In order to wipe  out  the whole  family  of  his brother, the accused  also  attempted  to murder  the brother's wife and the brother's daughter  when  they were also asleep.  Both the brother's wife and the daughter  were critically  injured by the accused by cutting their  necks.  The wife  of the brother, as a matter of fact, hovered  between  life and  death and remained unconscious for a number of days but  out of  sheer  luck she could survive.  The daughter of  the  brother also luckily survived after being seriously injured when her neck was  also  cut by giving a number of injuries in and  around  the neck.  It has been indicated by the learned Additional  Sessions Judge  that the accused was in full senses and had committed  the murders  of  four close relations one after the  other  and  also attempted to commit murder of his brother's wife and daughter  in a cool and calculated manner.  He did not even feel remorsed  and being  quite alive to the enormity of the crime committed by  him he escaped from the place of occurrence.  

24.  It  is  true that the appellant was not  convicted  for  any other offence on any previous occasion.  Such fact can hardly  be considered as a mitigating factor in favour of the appellant that will  outweigh all the aggravating factors and  circumstances  in which  the crime of the murders had been committed.  The  murders had  been committed very brutally and mercilessly  of  absolutely innocent  persons,  namely,  the Bua and two minor  sons  of  his brother  with whom there was no occasion to come in conflict  and to  entertain any grudge or ill feeling.  Even if it  is  assumed that  there was still some property dispute between the  brothers despite  sorting out of such dispute at the intervention  of  the Sarpanch, for such common place property dispute between brothers particularly  when  the  accused was not  dispossessed  from  the possession and enjoyment of his demarcated landed property by the deceased brother,  it cannot be reasonably held that the  accused had a genuine cause to feel aggrieved for injustice meted out  to him  in the hands of his deceased brother which may impel him  to cause  the murder of his brother.  In any event, there could  not be any cause to take a decision to wipe out the entire family  of the  brother in a very cruel manner when being asleep  they  were absolutely  helpless.  The members of the family of  his  brother were absolutely innocent and two of them were even minors.  Such murders  and attempt to commit murders in a cool  and  calculated manner without provocation cannot but shock the conscience of the society which must abhor such heinous crime committed on helpless innocent persons.  Punishment must also respond to the  society's cry  for  justice against the criminal.  While  considering  the punishment to be given to the accused, the Court should be  alive not only to the right of the criminal to be awarded just and fair punishment  by administering justice tempered with such mercy  as the  criminal may justly deserve, but also to the rights  of  the victims of the crime to have the assailant appropriately punished and  the society's reasonable expectation from the court for  the appropriate deterrent punishment conforming to the gravity of the offence and consistent with the public abhorrence for the heinous crime  committed by the accused.  In the facts and  circumstances of the case, we are of the view, that the crime committed by  the accused  falls in the category of rarest of rare cases for  which extreme penalty of death is fully justified.  We, therefore, find no  reason  to  interfere  with the sentence  of  death  awarded against  the appellant since confirmed by the High  Court.  This appeal and the jail petition being numbered as D.No.1007/96 stand dismissed.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAW
Indian Penal Code, 1860:
Section 300, Exception 4 read with sections 302 and 304 Part II - Murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder - Conditions to attract exception 4 - Sudden altercation - Deceased fell down after the Appellant caused the first injury - Appellant thereafter inflicted two injuries of fatal nature on the fallen man - Held that the offence is of murder and the appellant was rightly convicted under section 302.
HELD
... If the accused knows that the act he causes is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury it would attract clause fourthly. It would be murder unless it is brought in any one of the exceptions. In a given case even if the case does not fall in any of the exceptions, still if the ingredients of clauses 1 to 4 of Section 300 are not satisfied, then it would be culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under s.304 either clause 1 or clause 2. It is, therefore, the duty of the prosecution to prove the offence of murder. 
. ... To bring the case within exception 4 ... all the conditions enumerated therein must be satisfied. The act must be committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion; (2) upon a sudden quarrel; (3) without the offender"s having taken undue advantage; (4) and the accused had not acted in a cruel or unusual manner. Therefore, there must be a mutual combat on exchanging blows on each other. And however slight the first blow, or provocation, every fresh blow becomes a fresh provocation. The blood already heated or warms up at every subsequent stroke. The voice of reason is heard on neither side in the heat of passion. Therefore, it is difficult to apportion between them respective degrees of blame with reference to the state of things at the commencement of the fray but it must occur as a consequence of a sudden fight i.e. mutual combat and not one side track. It matters not what the cause of the quarrel is, whether real or imaginary, or who draws or strikes first. The strike of the blow must be without any intention to kill or seriously injure the other. If two men start fighting and one of them is unarmed while the other uses a deadly weapon, the one who uses such weapon must be held to have taken an undue advantage denying him the entitlement to exception 4. True the number of wounds is not the criterion, but the position of the accused and the deceased with regard to their arms used, the manner of combat must be kept in mind when applying exception 4. When the deceased was not armed but the accused was and caused injuries to the deceased with fatal results, the exception 4 engrafted to Section 300 is excepted and the offences committed would be one of murder. 
The occasion for sudden quarrel must not only be sudden but the party assaulted must be on an equal footing in point of defence, at least at the onset. This is specially so where the attack is made with dangerous weapons. Where the deceased was unarmed and did not cause any injury to the accused even following a sudden quarrel if the accused has inflicted fatal blows on the deceased, exception 4 is not attracted and commission must be one of murder punishable under s.302. Equally for attracting exception 4 it is necessary that blows should be exchanged even if they do not all find their target. Even if the fight is unpremeditated and sudden, yet if the instrument or manner of retaliation be greatly disproportionate to the offence given, and cruel and dangerous in its nature, the accused cannot be protected under exception 4. .....
If the weapon used or the manner of attack by the assailant is out of all proportion to the offence given, that circumstance must be taken into consideration to decide whether undue advantage has been taken. Where a person, during the course of a sudden fight, without premeditation and probably in the heat of passion, took undue advantage and acted in a cruel manner in using a deadly weapon there was no ground to hold that his act did not amount to murder. Therefore, if the appellant used deadly weapons against the unarmed man and struck him a blow on the head it must be held that using the blows with the knowledge that they would likely to cause death and he had taken undue advantage. He did not stop with the first blow, he inflicted two more blows on the fallen man and the third one proved to be fatal. He acted crudely with no justification. By his conduct the appellant denied himself of the benefit of exception 4 to S.300 I.P.C. 
.................................
It is not necessary that death must be inevitable or in all circumstances the injury inflicted must cause death. If the probability of death is very great the requirement of clause third is satisfied. If there is probability in a less degree of death ensuing from the act committed the finding should be of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The emphasis is sufficiency of injury to cause death. A judge must always try to find whether the bodily injury inflicted was that which the accused intended to inflict. The intention must be gathered from a careful examination of all the facts and circumstances in a given case. The citus at which the injury was inflicted, nature of the injury, weapon used, force with which it was used are all relevant facts. We find from the facts that the appellant inflicted fatal blow, i.e. 3rd injury severing the neck after the deceased had fallen on the ground due to impact of the first injury on parietal region. The third injury is proved to be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. Even otherwise death is inevitable. When the appellant inflicted two injuries on a fallen man, it must be held that he intended to inflict those two injuries, though the first injury may be assumed to have been inflicted during the course of altercation. Thus we hold that the offence is one of murder and the appellant was rightly convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for life under s.302 I.P.C. (Paras 7, 8, 10 and 12)

CASES REFERRED
1. Pandurang Narayan Jawalekar v. State of Maharashtra, 1979 (1) SCC 132. (Para 9)
2. Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala, AIR 1966 SC 1874. (Para 11)
3. Vira Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1958 SC 465. (Para 11)

J U D G M E N T
1. Special leave granted. 
2. The appellant was convicted under s.302 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life for causing the death of Jeet Singh on May 22, 1983 at about 11.00 a.m. in the field of the deceased. The Rajasthan High Court confirmed the conviction in Criminal Appeal No.105 of 1984. The case of the prosecution in nutshell was that the deceased and the appellant are neighbouring owners of lands. There was an altercation between them due to the appellant throwing soil into the lands of the deceased from "Dali" (strip of land dividing the two fields of the deceased and the appellant). Thereon the deceased went to the appellant to persuade him not to throw the soil into their field and to have the matter settled amicably through negotiations and if need be by measuring the lands, yet the appellant was annoyed with the conduct of the deceased and his sons PW-1 and PW-2 and son-in-law PW-3. At the instigation of his son by name Pappu (who was a juvenile offender and was dealt with separately), the appellant inflicted with Kassi (spade, sharp edged cutting instrument) on the head of the deceased and with its impact the deceased fell down. Thereafter the appellant inflicted two more injuries . When PW-1 to 3 raised alarm, the accused ran away. PWs-1 to 3 went near Jeet Singh and found him dead with bleeding injuries on head, neck and back. PW-1 went and lodge at the police station the report Ex.P-1 narrating the entire prosecution case. At the trial PWs-1 to 3 were examined as direct witnesses whose evidence was believed by both the courts below as natural witnesses and the appellant was convicted for the offence of murder. We found no infirmity in the assessment of the evidence, though the counsel for the appellant attempted to argue the case in that behalf. However, notice was issued to the State on the nature of the offence and the State has appeared. 
3. We have heard the counsel on both sides. During post-mortem the doctor found the following three injuries on the dead body: 
1. Incised wound 11 cm x 2-1/2 cm x 5 cm on the right pariete occipital area. Bone fractured Dura matter was seen from the wound. 
2. Incised wound 15 cm x 6 cm x 5 cm on the right scapular area bone fractured. 
3. Incised wound 13 cm x 10 cm x 12 cm on the right side of neck. All vessels of the right side neck were cut cervical vertebrae 4 and 5 along with the spinal cord was cut through and Larynx and right side of mandible cut. 
4. The witnesses have stated that when the appellant caused the first injury on the head, the deceased fell down and thereafter the appellant inflicted the other two injuries while the deceased was lying on the ground. The incised injury on the parieto occipital region was the first injury. The doctor found that by the third injury on the right side of the neck, the vessels on the right side of the neck, were completely cut, cervical vertebra along with spinal cord were cut through larynx and also right side of mandible. According to him, the third injury was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. 
5. The contention of the learned counsel is that the appellant committed the offence on the spur of moment when quarrel ensued between the appellant and the deceased, when the appellant was prevented to spread the soil in his field. So in heat of passion and on the spur of moment without premeditation the appellant inflicted injuries on the deceased. He had no intention to cause particular injuries, though later on proved to be fatal, Since he had no intention to cause such injury as is likely to cause the death and there was no pre-meditation, nor intention to kill, the case would fall under Exception (4) to s.300 I.P.C. Even otherwise no offence of murder has been made out. Therefore, it is only culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under s.304 Part II I.P.C. Having given our anxious consideration and the facts and circumstances do indicate that there are no merits in either contentions. Even if we assume that the appellant committed the offence during the course of a verbal quarrel between the appellant and the deceased one cannot escape from the conclusion that the offence is one of murder. 
6. Section 299 I.P.C. defines that whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide. Under s.300 except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder.........., thirdly if it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. Exception 4 thereof provides that culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender"s having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. Under s.302 whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both. Under second part of s.304 I.P.C. if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. 
7. It is, therefore, clear that culpable homicide is murder when the accused causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death. If the accused intentionally causes bodily injury which is found to be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death attract clause thirdly of s.300 I.P.C. If the accused knows that the act he causes is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury it would attract clause fourthly. It would be murder unless it is brought in any one of the exceptions. In a given case even if the case does not fall in any of the exceptions, still if the ingredients of clauses 1 to 4 of Section 300 are not satisfied, then it would be culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under s.304 either clause 1 or clause 2. It is, therefore, the duty of the prosecution to prove the offence of murder. 
8. The counsel attempted to bring the case within exception 4. For its application all the conditions enumerated therein must be satisfied. The act must be committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion; (2) upon a sudden quarrel; (3) without the offender"s having taken undue advantage; (4) and the accused had not acted in a cruel or unusual manner. Therefore, there must be a mutual combat on exchanging blows on each other. And however slight the first blow, or provocation, every fresh blow becomes a fresh provocation. The blood already heated or warms up at every subsequent stroke. The voice of reason is heard on neither side in the heat of passion. Therefore, it is difficult to apportion between them respective degrees of blame with reference to the state of things at the commencement of the fray but it must occur as a consequence of a sudden fight i.e. mutual combat and not one side track. It matters not what the cause of the quarrel is, whether real or imaginary, or who draws or strikes first. The strike of the blow must be without any intention to kill or seriously injure the other. If two men start fighting and one of them is unarmed while the other uses a deadly weapon, the one who uses such weapon must be held to have taken an undue advantage denying him the entitlement to exception 4. True the number of wounds is not the criterion, but the position of the accused and the deceased with regard to their arms used, the manner of combat must be kept in mind when applying exception 4. When the deceased was not armed but the accused was and caused injuries to the deceased with fatal results, the exception 4 engrafted to Section 300 is excepted and the offences committed would be one of murder. 
9. The occasion for sudden quarrel must not only be sudden but the party assaulted must be on an equal footing in point of defence, at least at the onset. This is specially so where the attack is made with dangerous weapons. Where the deceased was unarmed and did not cause any injury to the accused even following a sudden quarrel if the accused has inflicted fatal blows on the deceased, exception 4 is not attracted and commission must be one of murder punishable under s.302. Equally for attracting exception 4 it is necessary that blows should be exchanged even if they do not all find their target. Even if the fight is unpremeditated and sudden, yet if the instrument or manner of retaliation be greatly disproportionate to the offence given, and cruel and dangerous in its nature, the accused cannot be protected under exception 4. In Pandurang Narayan Jawalekar v. State of Maharashtra ((1979)1 SCC 132), the facts proved were that the appellant gave a blow on the head of the deceased old man who was advising him not to quarrel. The injury caused to the brain from one end to the other resulted in fracture as could appear from the evidence of the doctor. It would show that the accused must have struck the blow on the head of the deceased with an iron bar with very great force. Accordingly it was held that exception 4 does not apply though there was sudden quarrel and that the fight was not premeditated to cause death. It must be shown that the injury caused is not cruel one. The conviction for offence under s.302 by the High Court reversing the acquittal by trial court was upheld. 
10. If the weapon used or the manner of attack by the assailant is out of all proportion to the offence given, that circumstance must be taken into consideration to decide whether undue advantage has been taken. Where a person, during the course of a sudden fight, without premeditation and probably in the heat of passion, took undue advantage and acted in a cruel manner in using a deadly weapon there was no ground to hold that his act did not amount to murder. Therefore, if the appellant used deadly weapons against the unarmed man and struck him a blow on the head it must be held that using the blows with the knowledge that they would likely to cause death and he had taken undue advantage. He did not stop with the first blow, he inflicted two more blows on the fallen man and the third one proved to be fatal. He acted crudely with no justification. By his conduct the appellant denied himself of the benefit of exception 4 to S.300 I.P.C. 
11. In Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab (AIR 1958 SC 465), a leading forerunner on the point, this Court held that the prosecution must prove that bodily injury is present. The nature of the injury must be proved. Thirdly, it must be proved that there was an intention to inflict that particular bodily injury, that is to say, that it was not accidental or unintentional, or that some other kind of injury was intended. Once these three elements are proved to be present, the Court must further proceed with the enquiry and found that the prosecution has proved that the injury described is sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. This part of the enquiry is purely objective and inferential and has nothing to do with the intention of the offender. Once these four elements are established by the prosecution the offence of murder falls under clause thirdly of Section 300. It matters not that there was no intention to cause death or that there was no intention even to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. Once it is proved that the intention to cause the bodily injury actually found to be present, the rest of the enquiry is purely objective to be deduced by inference. But where no evidence or explanation is given about why the accused thrust a spear into the abdomen of the deceased with such force that it penetrated the bowels and three coils of the intestines came out of the wound and that digested food oozed out from cuts in three places, it would be perverse to conclude that he did not intend to inflict the injury that he did. The question whether there is intention or not is one of fact and not one of law. Whether the wound is serious or otherwise, and if serious, how serious, is a totally separate and distinct question and has nothing to do with the question whether the accused intended to inflict the injury in question. It was held in that case that the offence was one of murder falling under clause thirdly of Section 302. In Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala (AIR 1966 SC 1874), the bodily injury consisted of tying up the hands and the feet of the victim, closing the mouth with adhesive plaster and plugging the nostrils with cotton soaked in chloroform. All these acts were deliberate acts which had been pre-planned and, therefore, this Court held that the acts satisfied the objective tests of clause 3 of s.300 and were held to be sufficient in the ordinary course to cause death. Accordingly it was one punishable under s.302. 
12. It is not necessary that death must be inevitable or in all circumstances the injury inflicted must cause death. If the probability of death is very great the requirement of clause third is satisfied. If there is probability in a less degree of death ensuing from the act committed the finding should be of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The emphasis is sufficiency of injury to cause death. A judge must always try to find whether the bodily injury inflicted was that which the accused intended to inflict. The intention must be gathered from a careful examination of all the facts and circumstances in a given case. The citus at which the injury was inflicted, nature of the injury, weapon used, force with which it was used are all relevant facts. We find from the facts that the appellant inflicted fatal blow, i.e. 3rd injury severing the neck after the deceased had fallen on the ground due to impact of the first injury on parietal region. The third injury is proved to be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. Even otherwise death is inevitable. When the appellant inflicted two injuries on a fallen man, it must be held that he intended to inflict those two injuries, though the first injury may be assumed to have been inflicted during the course of altercation. Thus we hold that the offence is one of murder and the appellant was rightly convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for life under s.302 I.P.C. 
13. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.
**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Sections 299, 300, 302, 304, 304A - Culpable homicide amounting to murder and homicide not amounting to murder. Distinction inter-se and with rash or negligent act, stated. Cases of Alister Anthony Pereira [JT 2012 (1) SC 100] and Sanjeev Nanda [JT 2012 (7) SC 251] referred.
HELD
There are two kinds of culpable homicide: (i) Culpable homicide amounting to murder (Section 300/302 of the IPC), and (ii) Culpable homicide not amounting to murder (Section 304 of the IPC). A rash or negligent act that results in the death of a person may not amount to culpable homicide in view of Section 304-A of the IPC. In other words, such a rash or negligent act would be 'not-culpable homicide'. But, there could be a rash or negligent act that results in the death of a person and yet amount to a culpable homicide falling within the scope and ambit of Section 299 of the IPC. This distinction was clearly brought out (following Naresh Giri v. State of M.P. [JT 2007 (12) SC 433] which contains a very useful discussion) in State of Punjab v. Balwinder Singh [JT 2012 (1) SC 43]. (Para 14)

In Alister Anthony Pereira v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2012 (1) SC 100] and State v. Sanjeev Nanda. [JT 2012 (7) SC 251]. This Court found that a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder (within Section 299 read with Section 304 of the IPC) was made out and a conviction handed down accordingly. (Para 14.1.)

Sections 302, 304, 325, 326, 304A, 72 - Punishment under - Murder - Culpable homicide not amounting to murder - Evidence. Cases, where accused were convicted only for causing grievous hurt ignoring or overlooking provisions of Sections 299 and 304, discussed and analysed.
HELD
In State of Punjab v. Surjan Singh [1976 (1) SCC 588], this Court held that the High Court did not commit any error of law in coming to the conclusion that it did, namely, that a common intention of causing the death of Labh Singh was absent. The applicability of Section 304 of the IPC was not adverted to by this Court despite a homicide. (Paras 17 & 18)

Sardul Singh v. State of Haryana [JT 2002 (7) SC 496] was a case in which the Trial Court convicted Sardul Singh for the murder of Naresh Kumar while Jagtar Singh was acquitted. The High Court confirmed the conviction of Sardul Singh and also set aside the acquittal of Jagtar Singh. Both were held liable for an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. (Para 19)

In appeal, this Court held that the assailants had a common intention to inflict injuries on the deceased and not cause his death, that being the unintended ultimate result. Based on this conclusion, it was held that Sardul Singh and Jagtar Singh could be convicted only for an offence punishable under Section 325/34 of the IPC [10*]and must be acquitted of an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. (Para 20)

In Rattan Singh v. State of Punjab this Court held that Ram Singh, Dan Singh and Rattan Singh had only caused grievous injuries to Gaje Singh and therefore their conviction under Section 302 of the IPC could not be sustained. Therefore, they were convicted for an offence punishable under Sections 325 and 326 of the IPC. This Court did not examine the applicability of Section 299 read with Section 304 of the IPC despite a homicide. (Paras 21 & 22)

In Ninaji Raoji Boudha v. State of Maharashtra it was held that accused had given several blows to Bhonaji and one of them was "a forceful blow on the head which caused a depressed fracture and fissures all over" resulting in his death. This Court noted that from the evidence on record: (a) it could not be established who had given that forceful blow; (b) the evidence established that Ninaji and Raoji did not have a common intention of causing the death of Bhonaji but there was a common intention of causing him grievous injury. Consequently, due to the lack of any conclusive or specific evidence of who was responsible for the homicide and the absence of a common intention, Ninaji and Raoji were acquitted of the offence of murder but were convicted of an offence punishable under Section 325/34 of the IPC. (Paras 23 & 24)

In Ram Lal v. Delhi Administration it was held (by a three-Judge Bench) that the High Court had erroneously concluded that the deceased received only one injury on the head. In fact, he had suffered two injuries on the head. Additionally, it was found that the High Court also held that Ram Lal had given only one blow with a stick to Har Lal on the head. On these facts, it could not be said with any degree of certainty whether the blow delivered by Ram Lal proved fatal or the blow given by him did not prove fatal. In the absence of any clear identification of the blow given by Ram Lal, he was entitled to a benefit of doubt. However, since the common intention of the three assailants was to cause a grievous injury to Har Lal, therefore Ram Lal was liable for conviction under Section 325/34 of the IPC apparently applying the principle laid down in Section 72 of the IPC. (Paras 25 & 26)

Sections 302, 304, 325, 326, 304A, 72 - Punishment under - Murder - Culpable homicide not amounting to murder - Evidence. Cases, where homicide took place and at least one person was convicted for homicide, referred and analysed viz. Radhey Shyam [JT 1998 (7) SC 197], Jarnail Singh, Sk. Karimullah [JT 2009 (2) SC 263], but held that these decisions are not very relevant in present case. (Paras 28-35)

Sections 302, 304, 325, 326, 304A, 72 - Punishment under - Murder - Culpable homicide not amounting to murder - Evidence - Cases, where homicide took place, but conviction only for voluntarily causing grievous hurt, which could fall within Section 300, thirdly and requiring reconsideration, stated. Abdul Waheed Khan [JT 2002 (6) SC 274], Rajwant Singh, Virsa Singh, Thangaiya, Raj Pal [JT 2006 (11) SC 124], referred. (Paras 36-41)

Sections 302, 304, 325, 326, 304A, 72 - Punishment under - Murder - Culpable homicide not amounting to murder - Evidence - Homicidal death of a person - Finding the act to be that of causing voluntarily grievous hurt - While returning said finding, non-consideration of provisions of Sections 299 and 304 IPC - Jurisprudential point of view and sentencing point of view. Held that in such cases, where homicide has taken place but culprit is convicted and sentenced for voluntarily causing grievous hurt, consideration of provisions of Sections 299 and 304 IPC is important from jurisprudential as well as sentencing point of view because, a homicide either would fall under Section 300 or under Section 304. Offences affecting "life" are distinct from offences of "causing hurt". Where hurt results in death, either intended or unintended, it would fall in offences "affecting life". This distinction has been overlooked in cases where homicide took place, but conviction is for causing grievous hurt, though all such cases are decided on their own facts. Hence, a five step enquiry is must, but earlier decisions do not require any reconsideration.
HELD
When an act or omission of an accused causes the death of any person, he or she is either guilty of culpable homicide or guilty of not-culpable homicide. It is for the Court to determine on the evidence whether, if it is culpable homicide, it amounts to murder as explained in Section 300 of the IPC (along with all its clauses) or not as explained in Section 304 of the IPC. If culpable homicide cannot be proved, then it would fall in the category of 'not-culpable homicide'. (Para 43)

Section 320 of the IPC 'eighthly' relates to any hurt which endangers life, but does not extinguish it. In fact, as pointed out by learned amicus, the arrangement of sections in the IPC makes it clear that 'offences affecting life' are quite distinct from offences of 'hurt'. If hurt results in death, intended or unintended, the offence would fall in the category of an offence affecting life, else not. It is this distinction that has apparently been ignored or overlooked in the first category of cases, but as mentioned above, those cases were decided on their particular facts. (Para 44)

If an accused is guilty of murder, say under Section 300 (thirdly) he or she would be liable for a minimum of life imprisonment; if an accused is guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder under Section 304 he or she would be liable for a maximum of ten years imprisonment; if an accused is guilty of not-culpable homicide under Section 304-A of the IPC the punishment would not exceed two years imprisonment. On the other hand, if the court ignores or overlooks the question whether the homicide is culpable or not but merely treats the case as one of voluntarily causing grievous hurt punishable under Section 325 or Section 326 of the IPC for which the maximum punishment is seven years imprisonment or ten years/life imprisonment (as the case may be). (Para 45)

In our opinion, a five-step inquiry is necessary: (i) Is there a homicide? (ii) If yes, is it a culpable homicide or a 'not-culpable homicide'? (iii) If it is a culpable homicide, is the offence one of culpable homicide amounting to murder (Section 300 of the IPC) or is it a culpable homicide not amounting to murder (Section 304 of the IPC)? (iv) If it is a 'not-culpable homicide' then a case under Section 304-A of the IPC is made out. (v) If it is not possible to identify the person who has committed the homicide, the provisions of Section 72 of the IPC may be invoked. (Para 46)

None of the decisions require any reconsideration. The position in law is as we have culled out from the cases cited before us making it clear that in most cases the person who has committed homicide (culpable or not culpable) can be identified. But it is quite possible in some cases, such as in Ninaji Raoji Boudha and Ram Lal that conclusive or specific evidence is lacking to actually pin down the person who has committed homicide (culpable or not culpable). In such cases, the accused would have to be given the benefit of Section 72 of the IPC. (Para 47)

Sections 302, 304, 325, 326, 304A, 72 - Conviction/ Punishment under - Homicide of deceased - Assailants gave two lathi blows - Blows resulting in fracture of ribs and piercing of lungs - Injuries not accidental or unintentional - Assailants having common intention to cause grievous injuries - Nothing to show if they intended to cause some other injuries than those inflicted by them - Medical opinion showing injuries sufficient to cause death in normal course. Held that this homicide was culpable homicide (amounting to murder) and accused persons being guilty under Section 300, clause "thirdly", were punishable under Section 302. Virsa Singh relied and followed. High Court judgement, convicting and sentencing accused under Section 325/34, set aside. (Paras 48, 49)

Ed.: The Bench in this case has adversely commented upon reporting of too many judgements, including record of proceedings, due to "overweening judicial vanity" and "competing law reporting agencies" while making reference to text of "India's Legal System" by Mr. Fali S. Nariman.

CASES REFERRED
1.State v. Sanjeev Nanda [JT 2012 (7) SC 251] (Para 14.1.)

2.Alister Anthony Pereira v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2012 (1) SC 100] (Para 14.1.)

3.State of Punjab v. Balwinder Singh [JT 2012 (1) SC 43] (Para 14)

4.Sk. Karimullah v. State of A.P. [JT 2009 (2) SC 263] (Para 34)

5.Naresh Giri v. State of M.P. [JT 2007 (12) SC 433] (Para 14)

6.Raj Pal v. State of Haryana [JT 2006 (11) SC 124] (Para 41)

7.Thangaiya v. State of Tamil Nadu [2005 (9) SCC 650] (Para 41)

8.Sardul Singh v. State of Haryana [JT 2002 (7) SC 496] (Para 19)

9.Abdul Waheed Khan v. State of A.P. [JT 2002 (6) SC 274] (Para 36)

10.Radhey Shyam v. State of U.P. [JT 1998 (7) SC 197] (Para 29)

11.Rattan Singh v. State of Punjab [JT 1988 (1) SC 676] (Para 21)

12.Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab [1982 (3) SCC 221] (Para 32)

13.Ninaji Raoji Boudha v. State of Maharashtra [1976 (2) SCC 117] (Para 23)

14.State of Punjab v. Surjan Singh [1976 (1) SCC 588] (Para 17)

15.Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala [1966 (Suppl.) SCR 230] (Para 36)

16.Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab. [AIR 1958 SC 465] (Para 36)

Foreign Case Referred
:

1.William Jack Pike v. The Indian Hotels Company Ltd. [2013 EWHC 4096 (QB)] (Para 51)


MADAN B. LOKUR, J.

1. The question agitating us relates to the circumstances (if any) under which a conviction for murder under Section 300/302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) could be altered into a conviction under Section 322/325 of the IPC (voluntarily causing grievous hurt) or under Section 326 of the IPC (voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means), ignoring or overlooking the intermediate possibility of a conviction under Section 304 of the IPC.

2. The question has arisen since in this appeal, despite a death having resulted in an incident involving the respondents, their conviction for murder by the High Court has been altered to a conviction for voluntarily causing grievous hurt, ignoring or overlooking a homicide.

The facts

3. On 14th December, 1996 the appellant (Richhpal Singh Meena) and a few others were sitting beside a well near the agricultural fields. Richhpal's father Sunderlal Meena (deceased) had gone to inspect the fields. While he was there, Sunderlal met Kailash, Ghasi, Lala and their respective wives and their mother. Soon thereafter, there was a hot exchange of words between them regarding damage to the embankment in the agricultural fields.

4. Kailash, Ghasi and Lala told Sunderlal that they were looking for him and he had now walked into the trap. Saying this, Kailash caught hold of Sunderlal while Ghasi gave him a blow with a shovel and Lala gave him a blow with a lathi on his back. On receiving the blows Sunderlal fell down and on hearing noises, Richhpal and others ran towards the spot and found that Sunderlal was being beaten up by the ladies. With the assistance of those who were with him, Richhpal managed to take Sunderlal to a hospital in Alwar but he succumbed to the injuries.

5. A post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr. Amar Singh Rathore and he gave a report that 
the two injuries given to Sunderlal were sufficient to cause death in the normal course. The injuries were:

External injuries-

1. Contusion abrasion measuring 8 x 10 cm reddish, located on left side of the rear side of the back.

2. Contusion abrasion measuring 8 x 8 cm located on right side of chest.

Internal injuries-

Fracture on the 4th and 5th ribs located on right side of the chest. Right lung crushed measuring 4 x 3 x 1 cm. Blood clotting in lung. Fracture in 7th and 8th rib on left side. Lung crushed. Plurae and sic(?) of either side of the lungs torn.

5.1. Dr. Rathore deposed that shock, haemorrhage and lung injuries resulted in his death. The injuries were sufficient to cause death in the normal course.

6. On these broad facts, a charge sheet was filed against Ghasi and Lala for an offence punishable under Sections 302, 302/34 and 447 of the IPC.

7. On the evidence adduced before him, the Additional District and Sessions Judge-III, Alwar convicted Ghasi and Lala for an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC as well as for an offence punishable under Section 447 of the IPC. However, they were acquitted of the charge framed under Section 302/34 of the IPC.

8. Feeling aggrieved, the convicts preferred D.B. Criminal Appeal No. 403/1997 in the Jaipur Bench of the Rajasthan High Court. By a judgment and order dated 16 th April, 2003 the High Court concluded that Ghasi and Lala could be convicted only under Section 325/34 of the IPC and not under Section 302/34 of the IPC. The High Court also held that they could not be convicted under Section 447 read with Section 302 of the IPC. The sentence awarded to them was imprisonment for the period undergone, that is, about 18 months imprisonment.

9. It will be noticed that Ghasi and Lala were not convicted by the Trial Judge under Section 302/34 of the IPC but were convicted only under Section 302 and Section 447 of the IPC. Clearly, therefore, the High Court did not correctly record the final conclusion of the Trial Judge. However, this is a minor matter.

Our initial doubts

10. While hearing this appeal filed by the victim's son, we were a little surprised that the fact of Sunderlal's homicide was not taken into consideration by the High Court while convicting Ghasi and Lala and also that no attempt was made to ascertain from the evidence on record (if at all it was possible) to fix responsibility for his death either on Ghasi or on Lala or both. While we were ably assisted in the hearing by Ms. Sumita Hazarika, learned amicus curiae, we nevertheless felt that the issue required some greater experience. Accordingly Mr. Uday U. Lalit, Senior Advocate was requested to assist us in the matter, and he willingly agreed.

11. Mr. Lalit cited several decisions of this Court involving the death of a human being but in which the only punishment awarded to the accused was for voluntarily causing grievous hurt and not any punishment for homicide. Learned amicus expressed the view that the fact that a human being had died could not and should not have been ignored or overlooked in any of the cited decisions. Learned amicus was also of opinion that all these decisions were rendered by two Judge Benches of this Court and they needed reconsideration since they did not lay down the correct law.

12. We propose to deal with all the judgments cited by learned amicus as well as by learned counsel appearing for the convicts and then determine whether they need reconsideration. Homicide and the IPC

13. The IPC recognizes two kinds of homicide: (1) Culpable homicide, dealt with between Sections 299 and 304 of the IPC[1*] and (2) Not-culpable homicide, dealt with by Section 304-A of the IPC. [2*] For the present discussion we are not concerned with Section 304-B of the IPC.

14. There are two kinds of culpable homicide: (i) Culpable homicide amounting to murder (Section 300/302 of the IPC), and (ii) Culpable homicide not amounting to murder (Section 304 of the IPC). A rash or negligent act that results in the death of a person may not amount to culpable homicide in view of Section 304-A of the IPC. In other words, such a rash or negligent act would be 'not-culpable homicide'. But, there could be a rash or negligent act that results in the death of a person and yet amount to a culpable homicide falling within the scope and ambit of Section 299 of the IPC. This distinction was clearly brought out (following Naresh Giri v. State of M.P. [JT 2007 (12) SC 433 : 2008 (1) SCC 791] which contains a very useful discussion) in State of Punjab v. Balwinder Singh [JT 2012 (1) SC 43 : 2012 (2) SCC 182] in the following words:

"Section 304-A was inserted in the Penal Code by Penal Code (Amendment) Act 27 of 1870 to cover those cases wherein a person causes the death of another by such acts as are rash or negligent but there is no intention to cause death and no knowledge that the act will cause death. The case should not be covered by Sections 299 and 300 only then it will come under this section. The section provides punishment of either description for a term which may extend to two years or fine or both in case of homicide by rash or negligent act. To bring a case of homicide under Section 304-A IPC, the following conditions must exist, namely,

(1) there must be death of the person in question;

(2) the accused must have caused such death; and

(3) that such act of the accused was rash or negligent and that it did not amount to culpable homicide."

14.1. The distinction brought out in both the judgments has been accepted and followed, amongst others, in Alister Anthony Pereira v. State of Maharashtra [JT 2012 (1) SC 100 : 2012 (2) SCC 648] and State v. Sanjeev Nanda. [JT 2012 (7) SC 251 : 2012 (8) SCC 450]. In these two cases, this Court found that a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder (within Section 299 read with Section 304 of the IPC) was made out and a conviction handed down accordingly.

15. Therefore, it is quite clear that when there is a death of a human being, it may either be culpable homicide (amounting to murder or not amounting to murder) or not-culpable homicide, but it is a homicide nevertheless. Keeping this distinction in mind, the decisions cited by learned amicus may be considered.

Relevant decisions

16. This category consists of five cases in which despite a homicide, this Court convicted the accused only for voluntarily causing grievous hurt, apparently ignoring or overlooking the provisions of Section 299 and Section 304 of the IPC.

17. In State of Punjab v. Surjan Singh [1976 (1) SCC 588] the Trial Court convicted Surjan Singh and Charan Singh for the murder of Labh Singh and thereby having committed an offence punishable under Section 302/34 of the IPC. On appeal, the High Court altered the conviction to an offence punishable under Section 326/34 of the IPC [3*] even though one of the injuries was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. This was on the ground that they had, on the spur of the moment, formed a common intention to cause only grievous injury to Labh Singh. In other words, it was held that a common intention to cause the death of Labh Singh was lacking.

18. In an appeal filed by the State, this Court held that the High Court did not commit any error of law in coming to the conclusion that it did, namely, that a common intention of causing the death of Labh Singh was absent. The applicability of Section 304 of the IPC was not adverted to by this Court despite a homicide. The quantum of sentence awarded is unfortunately not mentioned in the Report.

19. Sardul Singh v. State of Haryana [JT 2002 (7) SC 496 : 2002 (8) SCC 372] was a case in which the Trial Court convicted Sardul Singh for the murder of Naresh Kumar while Jagtar Singh was acquitted. The High Court confirmed the conviction of Sardul Singh and also set aside the acquittal of Jagtar Singh. Both were held liable for an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC.

20. In appeal, this Court held that the assailants had a common intention to inflict injuries on the deceased and not cause his death, that being the unintended ultimate result. Based on this conclusion, it was held that Sardul Singh and Jagtar Singh could be convicted only for an offence punishable under Section 325/34 of the IPC [4*] and must be acquitted of an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. The sentence awarded was of two years imprisonment. Again, the applicability of Section 299 read with Section 304 of the IPC was not considered despite a homicide.

21. Rattan Singh v. State of Punjab [JT 1988 (1) SC 676 : 1988 (Suppl.) SCC 456] is a Record of Proceedings, two steps lower in the ladder than a judgment and one step below an order, and yet it has been found worthy of being reported. In this case, Gaje Singh was attacked by number of persons and he ultimately succumbed to the injuries received. Of the assailants, some were convicted for an offence punishable, inter alia, under Section 302/149 of the IPC. In appeal, the High Court upheld the conviction of three assailants, that is, Ram Singh, Dan Singh and Rattan Singh and acquitted the others. These three assailants were not only convicted for an offence punishable under Section 302/149 of the IPC but also for an offence punishable under Section 325/149 of the IPC and under Section 324 of the IPC.

22. This Court held that Ram Singh, Dan Singh and Rattan Singh had only caused grievous injuries to Gaje Singh and therefore their conviction under Section 302 of the IPC could not be sustained. Therefore, they were convicted for an offence punishable under Sections 325 and 326 of the IPC, as the case may be, and sentenced to five years imprisonment. Again, this Court did not examine the applicability of Section 299 read with Section 304 of the IPC despite a homicide.

23. In Ninaji Raoji Boudha v. State of Maharashtra [1976 (2) SCC 117] two persons (Ninaji and Raoji) were convicted by the Trial Court for an offence punishable under Sections 325 and 147 of the IPC and sentenced to five years imprisonment. This was despite the fact that the injuries caused by them on Bhonaji had resulted in his death. In an appeal filed by the State, the High Court convicted them for offences punishable under Section 302/34 of the IPC for causing the death of Bhonaji.

24. Ninaji and Raoji appealed to this Court and it was held that they had given several blows to 
Bhonaji and one of them was "a forceful blow on the head which caused a depressed fracture and 
fissures all over" resulting in his death. This Court noted that from the evidence on record: (a) it could not be established who had given that forceful blow; (b) the evidence established that Ninaji and Raoji did not have a common intention of causing the death of Bhonaji but there was a common intention of causing him grievous injury. Consequently, due to the lack of any conclusive or specific evidence of who was responsible for the homicide and the absence of a common intention, Ninaji and Raoji were acquitted of the offence of murder but were convicted of an offence punishable under Section 325/34 of the IPC and sentenced to five years imprisonment. It appears to us that the principle applied by this Court, though not so stated, is to be found in Section 72 of the IPC which reads as follows:

"72. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the judgment stating that it is doubtful of which.--In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several offences specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these offences he is guilty, the offender shall be punished for the offence for which the lowest punishment is provided if the same punishment is not provided for all."

25. Similarly, the principle laid down in Section 72 of the IPC appears to have been invoked in Ram Lal v. Delhi Administration in which four persons (including Ram Lal) were accused of having murdered Har Lal. The Trial Court acquitted one of them but convicted the others, including Ram Lal for an offence punishable under Section 302/34 of the IPC. In appeal, the High Court upheld the conviction of Ram Lal for an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC, while the other two were convicted under Section 325/34 of the IPC.

26. In appeal before this Court, the question was whether Ram Lal could have been convicted for an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. It was held (by a three-Judge Bench) that the High Court had erroneously concluded that the deceased received only one injury on the head. In fact, he had suffered two injuries on the head. Additionally, it was found that the High Court also held that Ram Lal had given only one blow with a stick to Har Lal on the head. On these facts, it could not be said with any degree of certainty whether the blow delivered by Ram Lal proved fatal or the blow given by him did not prove fatal. In the absence of any clear identification of the blow given by Ram Lal, he was entitled to a benefit of doubt. However, since the common intention of the three assailants was to cause a grievous injury to Har Lal, therefore Ram Lal was liable for conviction under Section 325/34 of the IPC apparently applying the principle laid down in Section 72 of the IPC. Accordingly, he was sentenced to five years imprisonment.

27. It will be seen that these decisions were decided on their own particular facts. This Court did not lay down any law that if there is only a common intention to cause a grievous injury without any intention to kill, an accused cannot be convicted of murder. This is quite obvious since it would result in an absurd situation in cases where a person smashes the head of another and pleads that he had no intention to kill the victim but only cause a grievous injury. The accused must be deemed to know the consequences of his act, unless it was accidental or unintentional.

Partially relevant decisions

28. The second category of decisions cited by learned amicus, though relevant, do not greatly 
advance our discourse any further since, in these cases a homicide had taken place and at least one 
of the accused was convicted for that homicide.

29. In Radhey Shyam v. State of U.P. [JT 1998 (7) SC 197 : 1999 (1) SCC 168] three persons were convicted by the Trial Court for the murder of Ram Saran. On appeal, the High Court set aside their conviction for an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC but convicted them for an offence punishable under Part I of Section 304 of the IPC and sentenced them to imprisonment for seven years.

30. Of the three persons so convicted only Radhey Shyam approached this Court and his contention was that he had not inflicted any blow on the deceased. On a consideration of the evidence, this Court concluded that there was nothing to show that Radhey Shyam had given the fatal blow, or for that matter any blow, that was likely to cause the death of Ram Saran. Accordingly, his conviction under Part I of Section 304 of the IPC was altered to a conviction under Section 325 of the IPC and the sentence reduced to two years imprisonment.

31. This decision is not so relevant since two of the assailants were convicted for causing the death of a human being and were not let off only for an offence punishable for having caused grievous injuries.

32. Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab [1982 (3) SCC 221] is a short order and by no stretch of imagination can it be considered to be a judgment and certainly not a reportable judgment - it is merely the disposal of a case. The order does not indicate the facts of the case and there is no discussion of the law. In any event, a reading of the order indicates that since there was no pre-concert between Jarnail Singh and Sarwan Singh to cause the death of the victim, their conviction under Section 302/34 of the IPC could not be upheld by this Court. The order does not indicate the nature of the injuries on the deceased or who inflicted them. All that can be deciphered from the order is that Jarnail Singh gave a simple injury to the deceased. Since that is so, he obviously could not have been punished for the offence of murder. However, it is not clear what injuries were given to the deceased by Sarwan Singh and whether he was convicted for the homicide or not.

33. We shall have occasion a little later to deal with the reporting of orders passed by this Court and the reporting of a Record of Proceedings.

34. In Sk. Karimullah v. State of A.P. [JT 2009 (2) SC 263 : 2009 (11) SCC 371] accused no.1 (not identified in the judgment) and Karimullah were convicted by the Trial Court for an offence punishable under Section 302/34 of the IPC. Their conviction was upheld by the High Court.

35. Only Karimullah approached this Court and it was found, on facts, that no charge was framed against him under Section 34 of the IPC. Additionally, there was a discrepancy in the eye witness account with regard to his role in the attack on the deceased. One witness stated that he had assaulted the deceased with a stick while another stated that he had given him a fist blow. Under the circumstances, on the basis of the evidence on record, this Court held that Karimullah was liable to be punished for an offence punishable under Section 325 of the IPC and not under Section 302 of the IPC. In this case also, at least one of the assailants was convicted for a homicide.

Earlier decisions of this Court

36. Learned amicus submitted that the cases falling in the first category above, in which there is a homicide but a conviction only for voluntarily causing grievous hurt, may even fall within Section 300 (thirdly) of the IPC and, therefore, require reconsideration. To illustrate his point, learned amicus referred to three decisions, the first being Abdul Waheed Khan v. State of A.P. [JT 2002 (6) SC 274 : 2002 (7) SCC 175] which decision in turn refers to Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala [1966 Supp SCR 230] and Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab. [AIR 1958 SC 465].

37. It must be made clear that learned amicus did not cite these decisions with a view to establish that the first category of decisions mentioned above were either incorrectly decided or that Section 300 (thirdly) of the IPC was attracted. That was mentioned by him only by the way. The principal reason for citing these decisions was to highlight the view taken by this Court that where violence is deliberately inflicted and it results in the death of a human being, culpable homicide is made out - the only question being whether it is murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

38. In Rajwant Singh this Court held (and it is futile to try and paraphrase the view lucidly expressed):

"In addition to the other evidence establishing the connection of Unni and Rajwant Singh with this crime there is a confession by Rajwant Singh before the Sub-Magistrate, Cochin in which he graphically describes the part played by him and Unni. Rajwant Singh also stated that they only wanted the Lt. Commander and the sentry to remain unconscious while they rifled the safe and took away the money. It is contended that we must accept the confession as a whole and must hold on its basis that the intention was not to kill, and that the offence of murder is therefore not established. As this is the most important point in the case we shall consider it first.

"This point was argued by Mr. J.G. Sethi on behalf of Rajwant Singh and his arguments were adopted by Mr. Harbans Singh on behalf of Unni. Mr. Sethi argued that the offence was one of causing grievous hurt or at the worst of culpable homicide not amounting to murder and punishable under Section 304 (second part) of the Indian Penal Code. It is quite plain that the acts of the appellants resulted in the death of the victim and the offence cannot be placed lower than culpable homicide because the appellants must have known that what they were doing was likely to kill. The short question, therefore, is whether the offence was murder or culpable homicide." (emphasis given by us)

38.1. On facts, it was held that a case of murder falling within Section 300 (thirdly) of the IPC was made out.

39. Rajwant Singh followed Virsa Singh (a three-Judge Bench) which conclusively lays down the requirements of Section 300 (thirdly) of the IPC in the following manner (again it is difficult to paraphrase the clearly articulated conclusions):-

"To put it shortly, the prosecution must prove the following facts before it can bring a case under Section 300 "thirdly";

First, it must establish, quite objectively, that a bodily injury is present;

Secondly, the nature of the injury must be proved; These are purely objective investigations.

Thirdly, it must be proved that there was an intention to inflict that particular bodily injury, that is to 
say, that it was not accidental or unintentional, or that some other kind of injury was intended.

Once these three elements are proved to be present, the enquiry proceeds further and,

Fourthly, it must be proved that the injury of the type just described made up of the three elements set out above is sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. This part of the enquiry is purely objective and inferential and has nothing to do with the intention of the offender.

Once these four elements are established by the prosecution (and, of course, the burden is on the prosecution throughout) the offence is murder under Section 300 "thirdly". It does not matter that there was no intention to cause death. It does not matter that there was no intention even to cause an injury of a kind that is sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature (not that there is any real distinction between the two). It does not even matter that there is no knowledge that an act of that kind will be likely to cause death. Once the intention to cause the bodily injury actually found to be present is proved, the rest of the enquiry is purely objective and the only question is whether, as a matter of purely objective inference, the injury is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. No one has a licence to run around inflicting injuries that are sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature and claim that they are not guilty of murder. If they inflict injuries of that kind, they must face the consequences; and they can only escape if it can be shown, or reasonably deduced, that the injury was accidental or otherwise unintentional." (emphasis given by us)

40. In Abdul Waheed Khan the Trial Court convicted three accused under Part I of Section 304 of the IPC. The High Court, on an appeal by the State, convicted them for an offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. This Court discussed Section 300 (thirdly) of the IPC, the object of the accused being to rob the deceased, the grievous injuries voluntarily inflicted on the deceased, the nature of injuries and then upheld the view taken by the High Court. The case did not directly concern Section 325 or Section 326 of the IPC but was cited, firstly, to explain the analysis undertaken by this Court in its earlier decisions and secondly, to highlight that Section 299 of the IPC takes care of every situation of culpable homicide and thirdly and most importantly, to illustrate that voluntarily causing grievous hurt resulting in death cannot be simply relegated to an offence punishable under Section 325 or Section 326 of the IPC.

41. Reference was also made by learned amicus to Thangaiya v. State of Tamil Nadu [2005 (9) SCC 650] and Raj Pal v. State of Haryana [JT 2006 (11) SC 124 : 2006 (9) SCC 678] which reiterate the view expressed in Abdul Waheed Khan.

The jurisprudence

42. A review of the decisions in the first category of cases, indicates that in spite of the death of a person, and a finding in some of them of an act of voluntarily causing grievous hurt, this Court has not considered the provisions of Section 299 read with Section 304 of the IPC. In our opinion, such a consideration is important not only from the jurisprudential point of view but also from the sentencing point of view.

43. From the jurisprudential point of view it is important because when an act or omission of an accused causes the death of any person, he or she is either guilty of culpable homicide or guilty of not-culpable homicide. It is for the Court to determine on the evidence whether, if it is culpable homicide, it amounts to murder as explained in Section 300 of the IPC (along with all its clauses) or not as explained in Section 304 of the IPC. If culpable homicide cannot be proved, then it would fall in the category of 'not-culpable homicide'.

44. We agree with learned amicus that the sections in the IPC relating to hurt (from Section 319 onwards) do not postulate death as the end result. In this regard, our attention was drawn to Section 320 of the IPC which designates various kinds of hurt as grievous and particularly to 'eighthly' which relates to any hurt which endangers life, but does not extinguish it. In fact, as pointed out by learned amicus, the arrangement of sections in the IPC makes it clear that 'offences affecting life' are quite distinct from offences of 'hurt'. If hurt results in death, intended or unintended, the offence would fall in the category of an offence affecting life, else not. It is this distinction that has apparently been ignored or overlooked in the first category of cases, but as mentioned above, those cases were decided on their particular facts.

Sentencing

45. The issue of sentencing is also of utmost importance in cases such as the ones that we have referred to. The reason is the quantum of punishment to be imposed in a given situation. If an accused is guilty of murder, say under Section 300 (thirdly) he or she would be liable for a minimum of life imprisonment; if an accused is guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder under Section 304 he or she would be liable for a maximum of ten years imprisonment; if an accused is guilty of not-culpable homicide under Section 304-A of the IPC the punishment would not exceed two years imprisonment. On the other hand, if the court ignores or overlooks the question whether the homicide is culpable or not but merely treats the case as one of voluntarily causing grievous hurt punishable under Section 325 or Section 326 of the IPC for which the maximum punishment is seven years imprisonment or ten years/life imprisonment (as the case may be), then there is a real danger in a given case of an accused either getting a lighter sentence than deserved or a heavier sentence (depending on the offence made out) than warranted by law. It is for this reason that not only a precise formulation of charges by the Trial Court (if necessary multiple charges) is essential but also a correct identification by the court of the offence committed.

Position in law

46. Having considered all the decisions cited before us (and perhaps there are many more on the subject but not cited), in our opinion, a five-step inquiry is necessary: (i) Is there a homicide? (ii) If yes, is it a culpable homicide or a 'not-culpable homicide'? (iii) If it is a culpable homicide, is the offence one of culpable homicide amounting to murder (Section 300 of the IPC) or is it a culpable homicide not amounting to murder (Section 304 of the IPC)? (iv) If it is a 'not-culpable homicide' then a case under Section 304-A of the IPC is made out. (v) If it is not possible to identify the person who has committed the homicide, the provisions of Section 72 of the IPC may be invoked. Since this five-pronged exercise has apparently been missed out in the first category of decisions, learned amicus was of the opinion that those decisions require reconsideration.

47. In our view none of the decisions require any reconsideration. The position in law is as we have culled out from the cases cited before us making it clear that in most cases the person who has committed homicide (culpable or not culpable) can be identified. But it is quite possible in some cases, such as in Ninaji Raoji Boudha and Ram Lal that conclusive or specific evidence is lacking to actually pin down the person who has committed homicide (culpable or not culpable). In such cases, the accused would have to be given the benefit of Section 72 of the IPC. Such cases arise if the investigation is defective or if the evidence is insufficient. But where it is possible to ascertain who is responsible for the homicide, the five-step inquiry can easily be carried out.

Conclusion on facts

48. Applying the five-step inquiry, it is clear that: (i) there was a homicide, namely the death of Sunderlal; (ii) the assailants gave two lathi blows to Sunderlal which resulted in the fracture of his ribs and piercing of his lungs. The injuries were not accidental or unintentional - the assailants had a common intention of grievously injuring Sunderlal and it is not as if they intended to cause some injury to him other that the ones inflicted. (iii) the opinion of Dr. Amar Singh Rathore confirmed that the injuries caused to Sunderlal were sufficient to cause death in the normal course. Consequently, the homicide was a culpable homicide. Applying the law laid down in Virsa Singh it is clear that Ghasi and Lala are guilty of the murder of Sunderlal, the offence falling under Section 300 (thirdly) of the IPC and punishable under Section 302 of the IPC.

49. Under the circumstances, we set aside the decision of the High Court and restore the decision of the Trial Court and convict Ghasi and Lala of the offence of murdering Sunderlal. The State will take necessary steps to apprehend the convicts so that they undergo life imprisonment as required by law.

Orders and Record of Proceedings

50. It may be mentioned, en passant, that the excessive reporting of judgments (including orders and Record of Proceedings) has been described by Mr. Fali S. Nariman, an eminent jurist, in 'India's Legal System' as "judgments factory" and "case law diarrhoea". He says that there are "just too many judgments reported which have to be cited, which have to be looked into, followed or distinguished, all of which take up a vast amount of judicial time". The blame for this lies partially on "overweening judicial vanity", partially on the lawyers who perceive that "everything that is said in each and every judgment or order of the highest court in any particular case has to be presented as binding law" and partially on competing law reporting agencies "who want their law reports to sell as widely as possible". One of his conclusions is that the "Laws proverbial delays are not because there are too many laws but because there are just too many judgments and orders concerning them."

51. If all of us in the fraternity of law desire to bring about some judicial reforms to ensure 
expeditious delivery of justice, we need to put our heads together and follow some sage advice and 
take remedial action before justice delivery gets timed out. Delays in our justice delivery have already been adversely commented upon William Jack Pike v. The Indian Hotels Company Ltd. [2013 EWHC 4096 (QB)] and it is now time for us to find viable and realistic solutions.

52. The appeal is allowed.

**********
CROSS CITATION
1973 SCC (1) 20
1973 SCR (2) 541

CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No. 173 of 1971. Appeal, by special leave from the judgment and order dated February 26, 1971 of the Allahabad High Court at Allahabad in Criminal Appeal No. 1229 of 1970 and Reference No. 96 of 1970. R. K. Garg, A. K. Gupta, Indira Jai Singh, V. J. Francis and R. S. Sharma for the appellant.

O. P. Rana for the respondent.

A. V. Rangam and A. Subhashini for the State of Tamil Nadu.

R. N. Bagra and M. Veerappa for the State of Mysore., 543 F. S. Nariman, Additional Solicitor General of India, P. Parameshwara Rao and B. D. Sharma for the Attorney General. Bakshi Sita Ram and R. N. Sachthey for the Advocate General, Himachal Pradesh.

A. K. Gupta for intervener (Shyam Narain).

R. K. Jain and R. K. Garg for Interveners (Duraipandi Thevar and Krishna Thevar).

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

PALEKAR, J. The appellant Jagmohan Singh has been convinced under section 302-IPC for the murder of one Chhotey Singh and sentencedto death by the learned Sessions Judge, Shahjahanpur. The conviction and the sentence are confirmed by the Allahabad High Court. on the appellant coming to this Court by special leave, special leave was granted limited to the question of sentence only.

The short facts of the case are that some six or seven years beforethe present offence, one Shivraj Singh, father of Jagbir Singh, a cousin of the appellant, was murdered. The deceased Chhotey Singh was charged for that murder but was eventually acquitted by the High Court. As a result of that murder, there was ill-feeling between Chhotey Singh, on the one hand, and the appellant and Jagbir Singh, on the other. Both of themwere minors at the time of the murder of Shivraj Singh.But by now they had grown up and it is plain from the evidence that Chhotey Singh's murder was the result of this ill-feeling. Chhotey Singh was murdered on September 10, 1969 at about 5.00 P.M. A day earlier, there was a quarrel between Jagmohan Singh and Jagbir Singh, on the one hand, and Chhotey Singh, onthe other, on the question of a right to irrigate their fields. However, the dispute was settled by persons who reached the spot at the time and nothing untoward happened. Next day, however, the appellant armed with a country made pistol and Jagbir Singh armed with a lathi concealed themselves in a bajra field and emerged from the same as Chhotey Singh passed by to go to his field for fetching fodder.The appellant asked Chhotey Singh to stop so that the matter between them could be settled once for all. Naturally Chhotey Singh tried to run away but he was chased by the appellant and shot in the back.Chhotey Singh fell down after running some distance and died. That is how the murder was committed. On the facts and circumstances of the case, the learned Sessions Judge held that the appellant deservedthe extreme penalty. TheHigh Court, while confirming the death sentence, observed 544 that there were no extenuating circumstances and the sentence of death awarded to the appellant was just and proper. The question is whether this Court should interfere with the sentence.

Under section 367(5) of the Criminal Procedure Code as it stood before its amendment by Act 26 of 1955 the normal rule was to sentence the accused to death on a conviction for murder and to impose the lesser sentence of imprisonment for life for reasons to be recorded in writing. That provision is now deleted and it is left to the judicial discretion of the court whether the death sentence or the lesser sentence shouldbe imposed. That discretionhas been exercised concurrently by the Trial Court and the High Court and the question is whether there are sufficient reasons forthis court to interfere with that discretion. As pointed out by this Court in Ram Narain and others v. The State of U.P.(1) this Court normally does not interfere with the discretion exercised by the High Court on the question of sentence unless the High Court has disregarded recognised principles in imposing the sentence and there hasbeen a failure of justice. It. cannot be said on the facts of this casethat there has been any breach of the principles governing the matter of sentence. The appellant had armed himself with a gun and was lying in wait for the victim to pass. There was no immediate cause. The murder was entirely motivated by ill-feelings nurturedfor years. The offence waspremeditated. On seeing the appellant, Chhotey Singh started running away, but he was chased and done to death. In these circumstances, it can hardly be said that the High Court did not exercise its discretion properly.We are, therefore, not inclined to interfere with the sentence imposed by the High Court.

Mr. Garg appearing on behalf of the appellant however, raisedthe question of constitutionalimpermissibility of the death sentence for murder, and we have to deal with the question at some length. In the first place he contended, the death sentence puts an end to all fundamental rights guaranteed under clauses (a) to (g) of sub-clause (1) of Article 19 and, therefore, the law with regard to capital sentence is unreasonable and not in the interest of the general public. Secondly,, he contended, the discretion invested in the Judges to impose capital punishment is not based on any standards or policy required by the Legislature for imposing capital punishmentin preference to imprisonment for, life. In his submission, this was a stark abdication of essentials legislative function,and, therefore, section 302-IPC is vitiated by the vice of excessive delegation of essential legislative function. Thirdly, he contended, theuncontrolled and unguided discretion inthe Judges to impose capital punishment or imprisonment for life is hit by Article14 of the Constitution. because two persons 545 found guilty of murder on similar facts are liable to be treated differently--one forfeiting his life and the other suffering merely a sentence of life imprisonment. Lastly it was contended that the provisions of the law do not provide a procedure for trial of factors and circumstances crucial for making the choice between the capitalpenalty and imprisonment for life. Thetrial under the Criminal Procedure Code is limited to the question of guilt. In the absence of any procedure established by law in the matter of sentence, theprotection given by Article21 of the Constitution was violated and hence for that reason also the sentence of death is unconstitutional.

The first submission is based on the provisions of Article 19 of the Constitution. That Article does not directly deal with the freedom to live. It deals with 7 freedomslike freedom of speech ,and expression, freedomto assemble peaceably and without arms etc., but not directly with the freedom to live. It is, however, contended that freedom to live is basic to all the several freedoms and since the enjoyment of those seven freedoms is impossible without conceding freedom to live, the latter cannot be denied by any land unless such law is reasonable and isrequired in general public interest. It was, therefore, contended that, unlessit was shown that the sentence 'of death for murder passedthe test of reasonableness and general public interest, it would not be a valid law.

We will assume for the purposes of the present argument that the right to live is basic to the freedoms mentioned in Article 19 and that no law can deprive the life of a citizen unlessit is reasonable and in the public interest. The question, therefore, for our consideration iswhether the law, namely, section 302-IPC which prescribes the sentence of death for murder passes the above test.

In this connection it would be proper to recall the observations of Patanjali Sastri, CJ in State of Madras v. V. G. Row(1) at page 607 : "It is important in this context to bear in mind that the test of reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to each individual statute impugned, and no abstract standard. or- general pattern, of reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases. The nature of the right alleged to have been infringed the underlying purpose of the restrictions imposed. the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied thereby. the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing conditions at the time. should all enter into the judicial verdict. In evaluating such elusive factors and forming their own conception of what is reasonable, in all the circumstances of a given case, it

(1) [1952] S.C.R. 597. 546 is inevitable that the social philosophy and the scale of valuesof the judges participating in the decision should play an important part, and the limit to theirinterference with legislative judgment in such cases can only be dictated by their sense of responsibility and self-restraint and the sobering reflection that the Constitution is meant notonly for people of their way of thinking but for all, andthat the majority of the elected representatives of the people have, in authorising the imposition of the restrictions, considered them to be reasonable." The responsibility of Judges in that reject is the greater, since the question as to whether capital sentence for murder is appropriate in modern times has raised serious controversy the world over, sometimes, with emotional overtones. It is, therefore, essential that we approach this constitutional question with objectivity and a proper measure of self restraint. The arguments advanced by Mr. Garg against death penalty per se were practically similar to those which were addressed recently to the Supreme Court of America in the case of Furmanv. State of Georgia (Nos. 69-5003, 619-5030 and 69-5031 decided on June 29, 1972) and obtained the assent of two Judges, Mr. Justice Brennan and Mr. Justice Marshall. In that casethe Judges were invited to reject capital punishment onthe ground that it violated the Eighth Amendment which forbade "cruel and unusual punishments". Brennan, J. accepted the validity of the challenge in these words :

"If a punishment is unusually severe, if there

is a strong probability that it is inflicted

arbitrarily, if it is substantially rejected

by contemporaryjustice and if there is no

reason to believe that it serves any judicial

purpose more effectively than some less severe

punishment, then the due infliction ofthat

punishment violates the command of the clause

that the State may not inflictinhuman and

uncivilized punishments upon those convicted

of crimes."

Marshall, J. observed as follows

"There is but one conclusion that can be drawn

from all of this-i.e., the death penalty is an

excessive and unnecessary, punishment which

violates theEighth Amendment. The

statistical evidence is not convincing beyond

all doubt, but, it is persuasive. It is not

improper at this point to take judicial notice

of the fact that for more than 200 years men

have labored to demonstrate that capital

punishment serves no purpose thatlife

imprisonment could not serve equally as well.

And they have done so with great success.

Little if

547

any evidence had been adduced to prove the

contrary. The point has now been reached at

which deference to the legislatures is

tantamount to abdication of our judicial roles

as factfinders, judges, and ultimate arbiters

of the constitution. We know that atsome

point the presumption of constitutionality

accordedlegislative acts gives way to a

realistic assessment of thoseacts.This

point comes when there is sufficient evidence

available so that Judges can determine not

whether the legislature actedwisely, but

whether it had any rational basis whatsoever

for acting. We have this evidence before us

now. There is no rational basis for

concluding thatcapital punishment is not

excessive. It therefore violates the Eighth

Amendment."

In another place he observed

"I believe that the great massof citizens

would conclude on the basis of the material

already considered that the death penalty is

immoral and therefore unconstitutional." The arguments advanced by Mr. Garg were intended to persuade us to come to the above conclusion on the abstract question as to whether death penalty for murder was constitutionally permissible.

It is, however, to be noted in the above case of Furman v. State of Georgia that though the learned Judges by a majority of 5 to 4 set aside the sentences of deathwith which they were concerned, it was only Brennan and Marshall, JJ. who were prepared to outlaw capital punishment on the groundthat it was an anachronism,degrading to human dignity and unnecessary in modern life. Theother three Judgesnamely Mr. Justice Douglas, Mr. Justice Stewart and Mr. Justice White who formed the majority along with Brennan and Marshall,JJ. did not take the view that the Eighth Amendment prohibited capital punishment for all crimes and under all circumstances. Mr. Justice Douglas, indeed held, that the death penalty contravened the Eighth Amendment. But his judgment is not capable of being read as requiring the final abolition of capital punishment.Mr. Justice Stewart and Mr. Justice White merelyconcluded that the death sentence before them must be set aside because prevailing sentencingpractices did not comply with the Eighth Amendment. The minority of four Judges (Burger, CJ, Blackmun, Powell and Rehnquist JJs) held that death penalty did not contravene the Eighth Amendment.Mr. Justice Douglas in reversing the death sentence was of the view that "the Eighth Amendment required legislatures to write penal laws that are even handed, nonselective, and nonarbitrary, and to require judges to see to it that gene-548 ral laws are not applied sparsely, selectively, and spottily to unpopular groups." As is clear from his judgment Douglas, J wasvery much exercised by the fact that the lawwith regard to death penalty was being enforced in a discriminatorymanner the victim being mostly the poor and the despised, especially, if he was a member of a suspect or unpopular minority-obviously meaning the Negros. At the end of the judgment, however, he made it clear that he was not considering in that case whether mandatory death penalty would be constitutional if it was enforced evenhandedly and in nondiscriminatory manner.Mr. Justice Stewart after notingthat at least two of his brothers (Brennan andMarshall,JJ) had concluded that the infliction of the death penalty isconstitutionally impermissible in all circumstances under the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments stated"theircase is a strong one. But I find it unnecessary to reachthe ultimate question they would decide". At a later stage he made it clear that"the constitutionality of capital punishment in the abstract is not, however, before us in these cases." Mr. Justice White started his opinion : "In joining the court's judgment, therefore, I do not at all intimate that the death penalty is unconstitutional per se or that there is no system of capital punishment that would comport with the Eighth Amendment. That question, ably argued by several of my Brethren, is not presented by these cases and need not be decided." It will thus be seen thatalthough the death Sentences in that case were set aside by a majority, three out of five Judges who formed the majority did not consider it necessary to outlaw capital punishment on the social and moral considerations which prevailed upon the other two Judges namely Brerman and Marshall, JJ. In short, even when the court was presented with a wealth of evidence compiled by Sociologists and research workers in refutation of the necessity of retaining capital punishment, only two Judges out of nine could be persuaded to hold that capital punishment per se is constitutionally impermissible. So far as we are concerned in this country, we do not have, in our constitution any provision like the Eighth Amendment nor are we at liberty to apply the test of reasonableness with the freedom with which the Judges of the Supreme Court of America are accustomed to apply "the due process" clause. Indeedwhat is cruel and unusual may, in conceivable circumstances, be regarded as unreasonable. But when we are dealing with punishments for crimes as prescribed by law we are confronted with a serious problem.Not a few are found to hold thatlife imprisonment. especially., as it is understood in U.S.A. is cruel. On the other hand, capital punishment cannot be described as unusual because thatkind of punishment has been with us from ancient times right 549 upto the present day though the number of offences for which it can be imposed has continuously dwindled. The framers of our Constitution were well aware of the existence of capital punishment as a permissible punishment under the law. For example,. ,Article 72 (1) (c) provides that the President shall have power to rant pardons, reprieves,respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence "in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death". Article 72(3) furtherprovides that "Nothing in subclause (c) of clause (1) shall affect the power to suspend, remind commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor of a State under any law for the time being in force."The obvious reference is to sections 401 and 402 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Then again entries 1 and 2 in List III of the Seventh Schedule refer to criminal law and criminal procedure. In entryno. 1 the entry Criminal Law is extended by specifically including therein "all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at the commencement of this Constitution". All matters not onlyreferred to offences but also punishments--one of which is the death sentence. Article 134 gives a right of appeal to theSupreme Court where the High Court reverses an order of acquittal andsentences a person to death. All these provisions clearly go to show that the Constitution-makers had recognised the death sentenceas a permissible punishment and had made constitutional provisions for appeal, reprieve and the like. But more importantthan these provisions in the Constitution is Article 21 which provides that no person shall be deprived of his life except according to procedure established by law. The implication is very clear. Deprivation of lifeis constitutionally permissible if thatis done according to procedure established by law. In the face of these indications of constitutional postulates it will be very difficult tohold that capital sentence was regarded per se as unreasonable or not in the public interest.

Reference was made by Mr. Garg to several studies made by Western scholars to show theineffectiveness of capital punishment either as a deterrent or as appropriate retribution. There is large Volume of evidence compiled in the West by kindly social reformers and research workers to confound those who want to retain thecapital punishment. The controversy is not yet ended and experiments are made by suspending the death sentence where possible in order to see its affect. On the other hand most of these studies suffer from one grave defect namely that they consider all murders as stereotypes, the result of sudden passion or the like, disregarding motivation in each individual case. A large numberof murders is undoubtedly of the common type. But some at least are diabolical in conception and cruel in execution. In some others where the victim is a person of high 550 standing in the country Society is liable to be rocked to its very foundation. Such murders cannot be simply wished away by finding alibis in the social maladjustment of the murderer. Prevalence of such crimes speaks, in the opinion of many, for the inevitability of death penalty not only by way of deterrence but as a token of emphatic disapproval by the society.

We have grave doubts about the expediency of transplanting Western experience in our country. Social conditions are different and so also the general intellectual level In the context of our criminal law which punishesmurder, one cannotignore the fact that life imprisonment works out in most cases to a. dozen years of imprisonment and it may be seriously questioned whether that sole alternative will be an adequate substitute for the death penalty.We have not been referred to any large scale studies of crime statistics compiled in this country with the object of estimating the need of protection of the society against murders. The only authoritative study is that of the Law Commission of India published in 1967. It is its Thirty-Fifth Report. After collecting asmuch available material as possible and assessing the viewsexpressed in the West both by abolitionists and the retentionists the Law Commission has come to its conclusion at paras 262 to 264. These paragraphs are summarized by the Commission as follows at page 354 of the Report

"The issue of abolition or retention has to be

decidedon a balancing of the various

arguments for and against retention. No

single argument for abolition or retention can

decide the issue. In arriving at any

conclusion on the subject, the need for

protecting society in general and individual

human beings must be borne in mind.

It is difficult to rule out the validity, of,

or the strength behind, many of the arguments

for abolition nor does, the Commission treat

lightly the argument based on the

irrevocability of the sentence of death, the

need for a modern approach, theseverity of

capital punishment, and the strong feeling

shown by certain sections of public opinion in

stressing deeper questions of human values.

Having regard, however, to the conditions in

India, to the variety of the social upbringing

of its inhabitants, to the disparity in the

level of morality and education in the

country,to the vastness of its area, to the

diversity of its population and to the

paramount need for maintaining law and order

in the country at the present 'juncture, India

cannot' risk the experiment of abolition ;of

capital punishment.

551

Arguments which would be valid in respect of

one area of the world may not hold good in

respect of another area, in this context.

Similarly, even if abolition in some parts of

India may not make a material difference, it

may be fraught with serious consequences in

other parts.

On a consideration of all the issues involved,

the Commission is of the opinion, that capital

punishment should be retained in the present

state of the country."

A very responsible body has come to the above conclusion, afterconsidering all the relevant factors. On the conclusions. thus offered to us, it will be difficult to hold that capital punishment as such is unreasonable or not required in the public interest.

In dealing with the question of reasonableness, we cannot ignorethe procedural safeguards provided by the statute. An accused charged for murder is first put up before a Magistrate, who on an examination of the evidence commits him to the Court of Sessions for trial. The accused knows at this stage what is, the evidence against him. The trial is conducted before a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge with considerable experience in the trial of criminal cases. if the Sessions Judge, after trial, comes to the conclusion that the accused is guilty of murder and deserves to be sentenced to death, he is required under section 374 of the Criminal Procedure Code to submit to, the High Court the proceedings before him and it is theHigh Court which has to review the whole evidence and consider whether the sentence of death passed by the Sessions Judge shouldbe confirmed.The rule under section 378 isthat this review of the evidence shall be made by a bench of not less than two Judges. If the sentence of death is confirmed, the accused can in appropriate cases appeal to the Supreme Court by special leave. In cases where the Sessions Judge acquits the accused of murder but theHigh Court in appeal sets aside the acquittal and sentences him to death, the accused is entitled under the Constitution to prefer an appeal as of right to this Court. It will be thus seen that there are inbuilt procedural safeguards against any hasty decision.

As iswell known, the subject of capital punishment is a difficult and controversal subject, long and hotly debated. It has evoked strong views. In that state of affairs if the Legislature decides to retain capital punishment for murder, it will be difficult for this Courtin the absence of objective evidence regarding its unreasonableness to question the wisdom and propriety ofthe Legislature in retaining it. A Bill for the abolition of capital 552 punishment was introduced in the Lok Sabha in 1956 but the same was rejected on November 23, 1956. Similarly a resolution for the abolition of capital punishment was introduced in the Rajya Sabha in 1958 but the same was withdrawn after debate. Later in 1961 a similar resolution was moved in the Rajya Sabha but thesame was negatived in 1962. A resolution for its abolition was discussed in the Lok Sabha but the same was withdrawn after discussion. All thisgoes to show thatthe representatives ofthe people do not welcome the prospect of abolishing capital punishment. In this state of affairs, we are not prepared to concludethat capital punishment, as such, is either unreasonable or not in the public interest.

The next contention of Mr. Garg was that by providing in section 302-IPC that one found guilty thereunder is liable to be punished either with death sentence orimprisonment for life, the legislature has abdicated its essential function is not providing by legislative standards inwhat cases the Judge should sentence the accused to death and in what cases he should sentence him only to life imprisonment. It may be noted here that prior to the Amending Act 26 of 1956, section 367(5) of the Criminal Procedure Code read as follows :

"If the accused is convicted of an offence punishablewith death and the court's sentences him to any punishment other than death, the court shall in its judgment state the reason why sentence of death was not passed."

By the amendment this provision is deleted and, as theCode at present stands, punishment for murder isone of the two--namely death or imprisonment for life. Neither section 302-IPC nor any other provision in the Criminal Procedure Code says in what cases the capital punishment is to be imposed and in what others the lesser punishment. It is, therefore, argued by Mr. Garg that the Legislature hasleft this awful duty to the Judge or Judges concerned without layingdown any standards to guide them in their decision. In fact he says the Legislature has abdicated its legislative function and this delegation of its power to the Judges is vitiated by the vice of excessive delegation. We think there is no merit inthis submission. Inthis connection wehave to take note of the policy of the law with regard to crimes and their punishments. The position in England is stated by Halsbury in Laws of England, Third Edition, Volume 10 at page 486. The relevant portion of para 888 is as follows :

"DISCRETION OF COURT AS TO PUNlSHMENT

In all crimes except those for which the

sentenceof death must be pronounced avery

wide discretion in the

553

matter of fixing the degree of punishment is

allowed to the Judge who tries the case.

The policy of the law is, as regardsmost

crimes, to fix a maximum penalty, which is

intendedonly for the worst cases, and to

leave to the discretion of the judge the

determination of the extent towhich in a

particular case the punishment awarded should

approach to or recede from the maximum limit.

The exercise of this discretion is a matter of

prudenceand not of law, but art appeallies

by the leave of the Court of Criminal Appeal

against an sentence not fixed by law, and if

leave is given, the sentence can be altered by

that court. Minimum penalties have insome

instances been prescribed by the enactment

creating the offence."

The position in India is practically thesame. The exception made in English Law with regard to the sentence of death does not hold good in India.The policy of our criminal law As regards all crimes, including the crime of murder, is to fix a maximum penalty-the same being intended for the worst cases, leaving a very wide discretion in the matterof punishment to the Judge. In England, murder and treason were offences for which thedeath sentence was mandatory. If after trial the accused was found guilty by the Jury, neither the Jury nor the Judge had any discretion in the matter of sentence. The Judge had to sentence the accused to death. The sentence may be reprieved by the Home Secretary after-taking all the circumstances of the case and other matters into consideration. But that was no part of the judicial process.

Absence of any discretion with regard to the sentence raised strongcriticism in England because it was recognised, as was done in many other countries, that death penalty was not the only appropriatepunishment for murder. A Royal Commission was thereupon appointed in 1949 to consider and reportwhether liability under the Criminal Law in Great Britain, to suffer capital punishment for murder should be limited or modified and if so to what extent and bywhat means.In its report published in 1953 the Commission found it impossible to improve the position either by redefining murderor by dividing murder into degrees. In para 535 of the Report it pointed out that "the general liability under the existing law to suffer capital punishment for murder cannotbe satisfactorily limited by such means, (i.e. redefining murder or dividing murder into degrees) because no legaldefinition can cover all themultifarious considerations, relating to the offender as well as to his crime,which ought to be taken into accountin deciding whether the supreme penalty should be exacted ineach individual case." Ile Commission considered various 554 alternatives-one of them being a provision on the lines of section 302-IPC which was pressed with great force, by Sir John Beaumonta former Chief Justice of theBombayHigh Court,and later a Privy Councillor.He pressed on the Commission the advisability of leaving it to the Judge whether the death sentence should be imposed or the lesser sentence, adding further that this procedure had worked quite well in Indiafor generations and there was no reluctance onthe part of the Judges toassume the responsibilityto pass the death sentence. The Judges in England, however unanimouslyrefused to accept such a responsibility. Thequestion thenarose whether the responsibilityfor the death sentence may be given to the Jury as was done in some of the States in America. The Royal Commission fell in with this suggestion and ex pressed itself as follows (See para 595 of the Report).

"It is not questioned that the liability to

suffer capital punishment under the existing

law is rigorous to excess. We cannot but

regard it as a reproach to our criminal law

that this excessive rigour should be tolerated

merely because it is corrected by executive

action.The law itself should mitigate it.

We havebeen forced to the conclusionthat

this cannot bedone by a redefinition of

murder or by dividing murder into degrees. No

formula is possible that would provide a

reasonable criterion for the infinite

variety of circumstances that may affect the

gravity of the crime of murder. Discretionary

judgment on the facts of each case is the only

way in which theycan be equitably

distinguished. This conclusion is borne out

by American experience : there the experiment

of degrees of murder, introduced long ago, has

had to be supplemented by giving to the courts

a discretion that in effect supersedes it.

Such a discretion, if it is to be part of the

legal process, and not an act of executive

clemency, must be given either to the Judge or

to the jury. We find that the Judges 'in this

country, for reasons we respect, would be most

reluctant to assume this duty. There remains

the method of entrusting it to the jury. We

are satisfied that as longas capital

punishment is retained this is the only prac-

ticable way ofcorrecting the outstanding

defects of the existing law."

In India the difficulty encountered by the Commission had been overcome long ago and it is accepted by the public that only the Judges shall decide the sentence. Where an error is committed in the matter of sentence the same is liable to be corrected by appeals and revisions to higher courts for which appropriate pro-555 visionwas made in the Criminal Procedure Code. The structure of our criminal law which is principally contained in the Indian Penal Code and the Criminal ProcedureCode underlines the policy that when the Legislature has defined an offence with sufficient clarityand prescribed the maximum punishment therefore, a wide discretion in the matter of fixing the degree of punishment should be allowed to the Judge. As pointed out by Ratanlal inhis Law of Crimes, Twenty-Second Edition page 93 "The authors of the Code had,, in' many cases not heinous, fixed a minimum as well as a maximum punishment. The Committee were of opinion that, considering the general terms in which offenceswere defined, it would be inexpedient, in most cases, to fix a minimum punishment; and they had accordingly so altered the Code as to leave the minimum punishment for all offences, except those of the gravest nature, to the discretion of the Judge who would have the means in each case of forming an opinion as to the character of the offender, and the circumstances,whether aggravating or mitigating, under which the offence had been committed.But with respect to some heinous offence-such as offences against the State, murder, attempt to commit murder, and the like-they had thought it right to fix a minimum punishment". In the whole code there is only one section (Section '303) where death is prescribed as the only punishment for murder by a person under sentence for imprisonment for life. There,are several other sections in which death sentence could be imposed, but that sentence is not mandatory. Under two sectionsnamelysection 302--murder, and section 121---waging-war against the Governmentof India, alternative punishments of death or imprisonment forlife are leviable. These are the two sections where the maximum punishment isdeath and the minimum is imprisonment for life. There are two other sections in the Indian Penal Code where the minimum punishment is prescribed-one is section 397 which provides that if at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurtto any person, the imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years and (2) Section 396 which provides that at the time of attempting tocommit robbery or dacoity, theoffender is armed with any deadly weapon, the imprisonment with which such offendershall be published shall not be lessthan seven years.As regards the rest ofthe offences,even those cases where the maximum punishment is the death penalty, a wide discretion to punish is given to the Judge. The reasons are explained by Ratanlal on the page referred to above.

"Circumstances which are properly and

expressly recognizedby the law as

aggravations calling for in

18-L498SupCI/73

556

creased severity of punishment are principally

such asconsist in the manner in which the

offence is perpetrated; whether it be by

forcibleor fraudulent means, or by aid of

accomplices or in the malicious motive by

which the offender was actuated, or the

consequences to the public or to individual

sufferers, or the special necessity which

exists in particular cases for counteracting

the temptation to offend, arising from the

degree of expected gratification, or the

facility of perpetration peculiar to the case.

These considerations naturally include a

number of particulars, as of time, place, per-

sons and things, varying according to the

nature of the case. Circumstances which are

to be considered in alleviation of punishment

are : (1) the minority of the offender; (2)

the old age of the offender; (3) the condition

of the offender e.g., wife, apprentice; (4)

the order of a superior military officer; (5)

provocation; (6) when offence was committed

under acombination of circumstances and

influence of motives which are not likely to

recur either with respect to the offender or

to any other; (7) the state of health and the

sex of the delinquent. Bentham mentions the

following circumstances in mitigation of

punishment which should be inflicted : (1)

absence of bad intention; (2) provocation; (3)

self preservation; (4) preservation ofsome

near friends; (5) transgression of the limit

of self-defence; (6) submission to the

menaces;(7) submission to authority; (8)

drunkenness; (9) childhood."

Indeedthese are not the only aggravating or mitigating circumstances which should be considered when sentencing an offender. The list is not intended to be exhaustive. In fact the Punjab High Court has held that considerable delay in the disposal of a case may be a factor in awarding lesser punishment. See Municipal Committee v. Baisakhi Ram(1). The policy of the law in giving a very wide discretion in the matter of punishment to the Judge has its origin in the impossibility of laying down standards. Take, for example, the offence of criminal breach of trust punishable under section 409--IPC, The maximum punishment prescribed for the offence is imprisonment for life. The minimum could be as low as one day's imprisonment and fine. It is obviousthat if any standards were to be laid down with regard to several kinds of breaches of trust by the persons referred inthat section, that would be an impossible task. All that could be reasonably done by the Legislature is to tell the Judges that between the maximum and minimum Prescribed for an offence. they should, on balancing the aggravating and (1) Crl. Law journal 475. 557 mitigating circumstances as disclosed in the case, judicially decide what would be the appropriate sentence. Take the other caseof the offence of causing hurt. Broadly, that offence is divided into two categories-simple hurt and grievous hurt. Simple hurt is againsub-dividedsimple hurt caused by a lethal weapon is made punishable by a higher maximum sentence-section 324.Where grievoushurt is caused by a lethal weapon, it is punishable under section 326 and is a more aggravated form of causing grievoushurt than the one punishable under section 325. Under section 326 the maximum punishment is imprisonment for life and the minimum can be one day's imprisonment and fine. Where a person by a lethal weapon causes a slight fracture of one of the unimportant bones of the human body, he would be as much punishable under section 326-IPC as a personwho with a knife scoops out the eyes of his victim. It will be absurd to say that both of them, because they are liable under the same section should be given the same punishment. Here too, any attempt to lay down standards why in one case there shouldbe more punishment and in the other less punishment would be an impossible task. What is thus true with regard to punishmentimposed for other offences of the code is equally true in the case of murder punishable under section 302-IPC. Two alternate sentences are provided one of which could be described as the maximum and the ether minimum. The choice is between these two punishments and as in other cases the discretion is left to the Judge to decide upon the punishment inthe same manner as it does in the case of other offences, namely, balancing the aggravating and mitigation- circumstances. The framers of theCode attempted to confine the offence of murder within as narrow limits as it was possiblefor them to do in the circumstances. All culpable homicides were notmade punishable under section 302-IPC. Culpable homicideswere divided broadly intotwo classes (1) culpable homicide amounting to murder and (2) culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Culpable homicide which fell in the one or the other of the four strictly limited categories described in section 300-IPC amounted to murder unless it fell in one of the five exceptions mentioned in that section, in which case the offence of murder was reduced to culpable homicide not amounting tomurder. Any furtherrefinement in the definition of murder was not practicable and, therefore, not attempted. The recent experience of the Royal Commission referred to above only emphasizes theextreme difficulty. The Commission frankly admitted that it was not possible to prescribe the lesser punishment of imprisonment for life by redefinition of murder or by dividing murder into degrees. It conceded that no formula was possible that would provide a reasonablecriterion forthe infinitevariety of circumstances,that may affect the gravity of the crime of murderthat conclusion forced the Commission to theview that discretionary judg-558 ment on the facts of each case is the only way in which they can be equitably distinguished. See : para595 of the Commission's Report.

American experience is not different. In some of the States murderand rape were punishable with death. But that was not the only punishment. The, Law gave the Jury discretion in capital sentencing, and the question arose recently before the Supreme Court of America in McGauthn v. California(1) whether in tile absence of any standards for deciding when the accused should be sentenced to death or to life imprisonment the provision of law which gives the discretion tothe Jury was constitutional.Mr. Justice Harlan delivered the opinion of five Judges and Mr. Justice Black substantially agreed with that opinion in a separate judgment. The majority held that "the infinite variety of cases and facets to each case would make general standards eithermeaning less 'boiler plate' or a statement of the obvious that no Jury would need." The majority agreewith the view of the Royal Commission already referred to and observed "those who have come to grips with the hard task of actually attempting to draft means of channeling capital sentencing discretion have confirmed the lesson taught by the history recounted above. To identify before thefact those characteristicsof criminal homicides and their perpetrators which call for the death penalty, and to express thesecharacteristics in language which can be fairlyunderstood and applied by the sentencing authority, appear to be tasks which are beyond present human ability." The model Judicial ('ode which was presented to the court as an attempt towards standardization was strongly criticised bythe majority who pointed out thattile Craftsmen of the Model Judicial Code had expressly agreed with ,he conclusion of the Royal Commission that the factors which determined whether the, sentence of death is the appropriate penalty in particular cases are too complex to be expressed within the limits of a simple formula. Some of the circumstances of aggravation and mitigationwere mentioned in the Appendix to, the Code. But it was pointed out that theDraftsmen of the Code did not restrict themselves tothe items referred to in the Appendix but expressly stated that besides the above circumstances the court was bound to take into consideration "any other facts that the court deems relevant". This only meant that any exhaustive enumeration of aggravating or mitigating circumstancesis impossible-the admission of which emphasizes the view that standardisation is impossible. Finally the majority observed at page 726 : "In light of history, experience, and the present limitations of human knowledge, wefind it quite impossible to say thatcommitting to the untrammeled discretion of the jury the power to pronounce life or death in capital, cases is offensive to anything in the Constitution."

(1) United States Supreme court report Lawyers' Edition, 28, 713. 559 In India this onerous duty is cast upon Judges and formore than a century the judges are carrying out this duty under the Indian Penal Code. The impossibility oflayingdown standards is at thevery core of the criminal law as administered in India which invests the Judges with avery wide discretion in the matter of fixing the degree of punishment. That discretion in the matter sentences as a already pointed out, liable to be correctedby superior courts. Laying down of standards tothe limited extent possible as was done in the Model Judicial Code would not serve the purpose. The exercise of judicial discretion on well-recognised principles is, in the final analysis, the safest possible safeguard for the accused.

It was next contended by Mr. Garg that uncontrolled and unguided discretion in thejudgesto impose capital punishment or imprisonment for life was hit by Article 14 of the Constitution. wedo not find any merit inthis contention also. If the Law has given to the Judge awide discretion in the matter of sentence to be exercised by him afterbalancing all the aggravating and mitigating circumstances of the crime, it will be impossible to say that there would be at all any discrimination, since facts and Circumstances of one case can hardly be the same as the facts and circumstances of another. It has been pointed out by this Court in Budhan Choudhry and others v. The State of Bihar(") Art.14 can hardly be invoked in matters of judicial, discretion. This Court observed at page 1054 "It has, however, to be remembered that, in the language of F ankurter, J. in Snowden v. Hughes, 'the Constitutiondoes not assure uniformity of decisions or immunity from merely erroneous action, whether by the Courts or the executive agencies of a State'. Thejudicial decision must of necessity depend on the facts and circumstances ofeach particular case and what may superficially appear to be an unequal application of the law may not necessarily amount to a denial of equal protection unless there is shown to be present in it an element ofintentional and purposeful discrimination..... Further, the discretionof judicial officers is not arbitrary and the law provides for revision by superior courts of orders passedby the Subordinate courts. In such circumstances, there is hardly any ground for apprehending any capricious discrimination by judicial tribunals." Crime as crime may appear to be superficially the same but the, facts and circumstances of a crime are widelydifferent andsince a decision of the court as regards punishment is dependent upon a consideration of all the' facts and circumstances, there is Hardly any ground for challenge under Article 14.

Lastly it was contended by Mr. Garg that under Article 21 of the Constitution no person shall be deprived of hislife except according to procedure established by law and, in his submission.

(1) [1955] S.C.R. 1045. 560 before the-sentence of death is passed there is, in fact, no procedure establishedby law. It is admitted that the Criminal Procedure Code lays down a detailed procedure but that procedure, according to Mr. Garg, is limited to the finding of guilt. After the accused is found guilty of the offence, there is no other procedure laid down by the law for determining whether the sentence of death or something less is appropriate in the case. Therefore, he contended, death sentence is unconstitutional. We are not impressed by this argument also. The accused who is charged for murder knows that he is liable to be sentenced to death in the Committing Court itself. He knows what the evidence is. He further knows that if after trial in the Sessions Court he is found guilty of murder, he is liable to be sentenced to the extreme penalty. Experience of trials shows that where the accused knows that the facts of the caseare against him. the whole attempt on the part of his counsel is to fill the record with as many circumstances in his favour as possible which would tend to show that he is either guilty of a lesser crime or, in any event, there are mitigating and extenuating circumstances. The court is primarily concerned with all the facts and circumstances in so far as theyare, relevant to the crime and how it was committed and since at the end of the trial he is liable to be sentenced, all the factsand circumstances bearing upon the crime are legitimately brought to the notice of the court. Apart from the cross-examination of the witnesses, the Criminal Procedure Code requires that the accused must be questioned with regard to the circumstances appearing against him in the evidence.He is also questioned generally on thecase and there is an opportunity for him to say whatever he wants to say. He has a right to examine himself as a witness, thereafter, and give evidence on the material facts. Again he and his counsel are at liberty to address the court not merely on the question of guilt but also on the question of sentence. In important cases like murder the court 'always gives a chance to the accused to address the court on the question of sentence. Under the Criminal ProcedureCode after convicting the accused the court has to pronounce the sentence according to law. In a Jury trial if the accused is convicted the Judge shall (unless he proceeds in accordance with the provisions of section 562) pass sentence on him according to law. See section 306 (2). Similarly, where the case is tried by the Judge himself sub-section (2) of section 309 says that if the accused is convicted, the Judge.shall,unless he proceeds in accordance with the provisions of section 562, pass sentence on him according to law. The sentence follows the conviction, and it istrue that no formal procedure for producing evidencewith reference to the sentence is specifically provided. The reasonis, that relevant facts and circumstances impinging on the nature and circumstances of the crimeare already before the court. Where counsel addresses the court with 561 regardto the character and standing of the accused,they are duly considered by the court unless there is something in the evidence itself which belieshim or the Public Prosecutor for the State challenges the facts. If the matter is relevant and essential to be considered, there is nothing in the Criminal Procedure Code which prevents additional evidence being taken. It must,however, be statedthat it is not the experience of criminal courts in India that the accused with a view to obtaining a reduced sentence ever offers to call additional evidence. However, it is necessary to emphasize that the court is principally concernedwith the facts and circumstances, whether aggravating or mitigating, which are connectedwith the particular crime under inquiry. All such facts and circumstances are capable of being proved in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Evidence Actin a trial regulated by the Cr. P.C. The trial does not come to an end until all the relevant facts are proved and the counsel on both sides have an opportunity to address thecourt. The only thing that remains is for the Judge to decide on the guilt and punishment and that is what section 306(2) and 309(2)Cr. P.C. purport to provide for. These provisions are part of the procedure established by law and, unless it is shown that they are invalid for any other reasons,they must be 'regarded as valid. No reasons are offered toshow that they are constitutionally invalid, and, hence, the death sentence imposed after trial in accordance with the procedure established by law is not unconstitutional under Article 21.

In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed. G.C. Appeal dismissed. 562
**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAW
Indian Penal Code, 1860:
Section  302 - Murder of wife - Accused produced in the  police  station  alongwith  blood stained clothes and the  weapon  with  which  he killed his wife - Clear clinching evidence  establish  that it was appellant and no one else had committed the  murder  - Conviction and sentence upheld.
HELD
... (I)t appears to us that the factum of lodging the F.I.R. by PW.1 Bishan Dial and also the factum of producing the  accused  with  blood  stained  clothes and the said toka  with  which  the murder had been committed by Bishan Dial have been clearly established  by  the deposition of investigating officer.  We  do  not find  any  reason to discard the evidence  of  the  investigating officer to the above effect.  No suggestion was given to the said investigating  officer on behalf of the accused that he  had  any occasion  to have animus against the accused for which there  was likelihood of fabricating false evidence by the said  investigating officer against the accused.  PW.1 Bishan Dial has deposed to the effect that he along with his brother had been to the  police  station.  Although he has stated in his deposition that his thumb impression  was  taken on a paper in the police  station  but  no attempt was made to support such contention by examining his  own brother  as  a defence witness. It has also been  clearly  established  from  the evidence of the son of the  deceased  that  the  accused  used  to live with the deceased in the  said  house  and nobody else used to live there.  Shortly after the incident,  the appellant  was  produced  in the police station  with  his  blood stained clothes and the toka.  From the report of the serologist, it  has been established that the said clothes and the toka  contained human blood.  No explanation has been giving as to how and under  what circumstances, the clothes of the  accused  contained blood stains when he was apprehended shortly after the  incident.  The  circumstances  established by clear and  clinching  evidence only  indicate  that  it was the appellant and no  one  else  had committed  the said murder.  It will be appropriate  to  indicate here that corroboration is a rule of prudence.  Evidentiary value of  a deposition which is otherwise admissible is not just  wiped out  in  the absence of corroboration.  Even in  the  absence  of corroboration, a deposition for its quality may be safely accepted  to be correct.  It will be unfortunate if on account of  over emphasis for corroboration, a crime goes unpunished by not giving due  weight on our uncorroborated evidence when such evidence  is otherwise reliable.  We, therefore, find no reason to  interfere with conviction and sentence passed against the appellant and the appeal is accordingly dismissed. [Para 6]

Evidence
Evidence - Evidentiary value of deposition - Absence of corroboration  -  Corroboration is a rule of prudence -  However  the  evidentiary value of a deposition which is otherwise admissible  is  not  just wiped out in the absence of corroboration  -  It  will be unfortunate if on account of over emphasis for corroboration, a crime goes unpunished by not giving due weight on our  uncorroborated  evidence when such evidence is otherwise  reliable. [Para 6]


G.N. RAY, J. :

1.  This  is  an appeal under Section 14 (1) of  the  Terrorists Affected  Areas (Special Courts) Act, 1984.  This appeal  is  directed  against the order dated November 28, 1984 passed  by  the learned  Judge, Special Court, Ferozpur, in Trial No.27  of  1984 arising  out of F.I.R.No.141 of 1984 of the Police Station,  Abohar, under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and was sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life.

2.  The  prosecution case in short is that the appellant  had  a strained  relation with his wife Chameli Devi, the  deceased,  on account  of Chameli Devi having illicit relation with one  Kirpal Singh.  On May 8, 1984, P.W.1-Bishan Dial, his brother  Tej  Ram and  the wife of Bishan Dial, Dropati, went to the house  of  the appellant  Pattu Lal to get the dispute between the deceased  and Pattu  Lal settled.  The deceased threatened to get  divorce  and marry Kirpal Singh.  On the night of May 24 and 25 of 1984,  PW.1 Bishan Dial, said Tej Ram and Dropati slept at the house of Pattu Lal and at about 6.00 a.m. on May 28, 1984, Bishan Dial got up on hearing  alarm and saw Pattu Lal giving injuries to Chameli  Devi with 'toka' and Chameli Devi died at the spot.  PW.1 Bishan  Dial took his father with his blood stained clothes and the said  toka Ex.M/G/1  to  the  police station, Abohar, where  he  lodged  the F.I.R.  Ex.P.1  at  about 7.00 a.m.  On the  basis  of  the  said F.I.R.,  a  case under Section 302 of the Indian Penal  Code  was registered.  PW.3  Shri Thakur Singh, Additional  Station  House Officer,  took  up the investigation who placed Pattu  Lal  under arrest and the blood stained toka and also blood stained  clothes produced  before him were seized.  Thereafter, the said  Investigating  Officer (PW.3) proceeded to the spot and collected  blood stained  earth under memo of seizure Ex.P.7 and also  seized  the blanket  and  chadar  of the deceased  by  seizure  Memo  effects Ex.P.8.  Autopsy of the dead body of Chameli Devi was  performed by  Dr.Dalip  Kumar on May 25, 1984 at about 3.30  p.m.  In  the opinion  of  the doctor, the death was caused due  to  shock  and haemorrhage due to injury No.1 which was sufficient in the  ordinary  course of nature to cause death.  The prosecution  examined Bishan  Dial  PW.1, the son of the accused and  also  the  doctor holding  the post mortem examination (PW.2 Dr.Dalip  Kumar),  the said Investigating Officer PW.3 and other formal witnesses.  PW.1 Bishan  Dial  was, however, declared hostile and  he  was  cross-examined  by the learned Public Prosecutor.  It appears from  the deposition  of  PW.1 that his father and the mother  were  living together  and Bishan with his wife and brother Tej Ram  had  been living  separately in a different house.  The said  witness  also admitted  that  at the police station he had given a  thumb  mark under the F.I.R.  He also admitted that his brother Tej Ram  also accompanied  him to the police station.  No plausible reason  has been indicated by the said witness which might have prompted  the said Investigating Officer to fabricate the said F.I.R. on making false allegations.  The investigating officer specifically stated in  his  deposition that the accused was produced at  about  7.00 a.m.  at the police station by PW.1 Bishan Dial himself  and  the blood  stained clothes and the 'toka' with which murder had  been committed were also produced by the said Bishan Dial.  It may  be stated  here  that the blood stained clothes and  the  toka  with which the murder is alleged to have been committed had been  sent for  forensic test and the report is to the effect that the  said clothes and the toka contained human blood.

3.  The  learned  counsel for the appellant  has  very  strongly contended  before  us at the hearing of this appeal that  in  the instant  case,  the  prosecution wanted to prove  the  charge  of murder  by  examining  Bishan Dial who was stated to  be  an  eye witness.  But the said Bishan Dial has denied in his  deposition that  he had seen the occurrence and he has also denied  that  he lodged  the F.I.R. with the police station.  He has  specifically stated  that in the police station, a thumb impression was  taken from  him.  The learned counsel has submitted  that  such  thumb impression  has  since been utilised in F.I.R.  and  no  reliance should  be  placed on such F.I.R.  The learned  counsel  for  the appellant has also contended that the prosecution has not come up with  a case of murder to be established by  circumstantial  evidences.  On the contrary, the positive case of  the  prosecution was  that  the  case of murder was witnessed by the  son  of  the deceased.  But the prosecution has failed to establish such  case because  of the denial about the said case of murder by the  son, Bishan Dial.  The learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that simply on the basis  of the deposition of the  Investigating Officer, the case against the appellant cannot be accepted in the absence  of any convincing evidence by way of corroboration.  He has, therefore, submitted that the prosecution case must fail  by holding  that  it was a case of blind murder not  proved  by  any convincing and clinching evidence.

4.  Mr.Ranbir Yadav, learned counsel for the State, has,  however, submitted before us that in the instant case, the police  did not  arrest the accused on the basis of any information  received from  any other source.  The accused was arrested at the time  of lodging  the F.I.R. by Bishan Dial because the accused  was  produced  by  his son Bishan at the police station, at the  time  of lodging the F.I.R. with the blood stained clothes of the  appellant  and  the  toka, the weapon with which the  murder  had  been committed.  The investigating officer has clearly deposed in this case that the said Bishan Dial lodged  the said F.I.R. and handed over his father along with blood stained clothes and the  weapon.  In  view of such evidence, there is no difficulty  in  convicting the appellant for the said offence of murder and in the facts  of the case, no interference by this Court is called for.

5.  We  requested Mr.Natarajan, the learned Senior Advocate,  to assist the Court as amicus curaie and we place on record our deep appreciation  for the valuable assistance given by  Mr.Natarajan.  Mr.Natarajan  has submitted before us that although  PW.1  Bishan Dial  has denied the factum of lodging the F.I.R. and making  the statement  recorded  in F.I.R. and has also denied  that  he  had witnessed the said occurrence of murder, but the contradiction in his deposition with the statement recorded in the F.I.R. and also in the statements made by him under Section 161 of  Crl.Procedure Code  have been clearly established by the investigating  officer PW.3  in  his  deposition.  The statement of  Bishambher  to  the extent  of  contradiction in his statement in F.I.R. and  in  the statement  made  before the police became  substantive  evidence.  Mr.Natarajan  has also submitted that apart from  such  evidence, the investigating officer has also deposed in this case by  stating  that the son of the deceased Bishan Dial lodged  the  F.I.R. and  also produced the accused at the time of lodging the  F.I.R. and  blood  stained clothes of the accused and  the  weapon  with which the murder had been committed, had also deposited with  the police  by the said Bishan Dial.  There is no suggestion  to  the said investigating officer in cross examination that  he had  any reason to depose falsely against the accused in this case.  From the deposition of the son of the deceased it has been established that  the  accused used to stay with the deceased  in  the  house where  murder had been committed and no one else used to stay  in the said house.  It has come out in the evidence of the  investigating  officer that shortly after the said incident of  murder, the  accused  was  presented in the  police  station  with  blood stained clothes and the toka, by the son of the deceased.  It has been  established  from  the serological  report  that  the  said clothes  and the weapon contained human blood.  Such  evidences, even in the absence of direct evidence of murder, clearly  establish the prosecution case beyond doubt.  Accordingly, the conviction of the appellant for murder of his wife cannot be held to be bad or illegal.

6.  After  giving  our anxious consideration to  the  facts  and circumstances  of the case and the evidences adduced in the  case and  submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties  and also  by  Mr.Natarajan, learned amicus curaie, it appears  to  us that  the  factum of lodging the F.I.R. by PW.1 Bishan  Dial  and also  the  factum of producing the accused  with  blood  stained clothes and the said toka with which the murder had been  committed  by Bishan Dial have been clearly established by the  deposition  of  investigating officer.  We do not find  any  reason  to discard  the evidence of the investigating officer to  the  above effect.  No suggestion was given to the said investigating officer  on  behalf of the accused that he had any  occasion  to  have animus  against  the accused for which there  was  likelihood  of fabricating  false  evidence by the  said  investigating  officer against the accused.  PW.1 Bishan Dial has deposed to the  effect that  he along with his brother had been to the police  station.  Although  he has stated in his deposition that his thumb  impression  was taken on a paper in the police station but  no  attempt was made to support such contention by examining his own  brother as  a defence witness. It has also been clearly established  from the evidence of the son of the deceased that the  accused used to live with the deceased in the said house and nobody else used  to live  there.  Shortly after the incident, the appellant was  produced  in the police station with his blood stained  clothes  and the toka.  From the report of the serologist, it has been  established that the said clothes and the toka contained human  blood.  No  explanation has been giving as to how and under what  circumstances,  the clothes of the accused contained blood stains  when he was apprehended shortly after the incident.  The circumstances established by clear and clinching evidence only indicate that it was the appellant and no one else had committed the said  murder.  It  will be appropriate to indicate here that corroboration is  a rule  of  prudence.  Evidentiary value of a deposition  which  is otherwise  admissible  is not just wiped out in  the  absence  of corroboration.  Even in the absence of corroboration, a  deposition  for its quality may be safely accepted to be  correct.  It will be unfortunate if on account of over emphasis for corroboration,  a  crime goes unpunished by not giving due weight  on  our uncorroborated evidence when such evidence is otherwise reliable.  We,  therefore, find no reason to interfere with  conviction  and sentence  passed against the appellant and the appeal is  accordingly dismissed.  The appellant has been released on bail  during the pendency of this appeal.  He should be arrested forthwith  to serve out the sentence.

**********
CROSS CITATION
1973 SC 337 (24,27)
1967 SCR (3) 256

CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Criminal Appeal No. 210 of 1966. Appealby special leave from the judgment andorder dated March 22, 1966 of the Punjab High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 26 of 1966 and Murder Reference No. 2 of 1966. Jai Gopal Sethi, C. L. Sareen and R. L. Kohli, for theappelants.

Hans Rai Khanna and R. N. Sachthey, for the respondent. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

Bachawat, J. Six persons including, the two appellantswere tried for offences under s. 148, S. 302 read with s.1.49 and s. 201 257 read with S. 149 of the Indian Penal Code in connection with the murder of Tarlok Singh son of Amar Singh of Purana Pind. The six accused were (1) Jagir Singh of Purana Pind, (2) Tarlok Singh of Udhoke, (3) Wassan Singh of Purana Pind, (4) Jagir Singh of Bhumbli, (5) Dyal Singh of Dalla and (6) PritamSingh of Dalla. Tarlok Singh deceased was brutally attacked on the threshing floor of Amar Singh at a distance of eighty feet from his Haveli near the outskirt of village PuranaPind on April 27, 1965 atabout 4 p.m. The prosecution case was that all the six accused came to the spot with the object of killing Tarlok Singh, accused 5 was riding a white mare and carrying a spear, and the remaining five accused were on foot and were armed with kirpans or swords. Accused 5 shouted a challenge sayingthat Tarlok Singh must not be spared, accused 4 gave two kirpan blows on his feet, accused I gave a sword blow on his neck and the other accusedcaused injuries to himwith their swords. When the victim was almost dead, he was placed on themare in front of accused 5 and all the six accused proceeded towards village Manobarpura. At a distance of about amile near the canal minor, the body of the victim was thrown on the ground and accused 2 chopped the head from his body. Accused 2 and 5 rode away on the mare with the severedhead wrapped in the chaddar and turban of the victim and the other accused followed on foot. The motive for the attack was that Munsha Singh father of accused I wasmurdered in July, 1964. Amar Singh, Tarlok Singh deceased and one Sawan Singh were tried for the murder but they were convicted of a lesser offence for which they were sentenced to three months rigorous imprisonment.They served out their sentences and returned to village Purana Pind about two months before April 27, 1965. The first information report of the murder of Tarlok Singh was lodged on April 27, 1965 at 5.30p.m. The investigating officer reached the spot at about6.30 p.m. The trunk of the dead body was recovered at a place about a mile distant from village Purana Pind near the canal minor. The head was never recovered.The identity of the trunkwas satisfactorily established. The postmortem examination revealed six injuries. In the opinion of the medical witness, the death resulted from the cutting of the neck, caused with some, sharp-edged heavy weapon. The first information report stated that the assailants of Tarlok Singh were accused 1, 3, 5, 6, one Harbans Singh and one Jarnail Singh who were then said to have played the parts later ascribed to accused 2 and 4. All the six accused and Harbans Singh and Jarnail Singh were charge-sheeted. The committing magistrate discharged Harbans Singh and. Jarnail Singh and committed the six accused to the Sessions Court for trial. The four eyewitnesses examined at the trial were Amar Singh, father of the victim, Joginder Singh son of Amar- Singh, Bachan Singh, son-in-law of Amar Singh and Chhinda whose maternal uncle's daughter was betrothed to the victim. Amar Singh was injured 258 by one of the culprits when he tried to intervene in the attackon his son. He made contradictory statementswith regardto the identity of the culprit who had (injured him and the six culprits who had participated in the attack on his son. The Sessions Judge acquitted accused 2, 3, 4 and 6. Hewas not satisfied that the witnesses had correctly identified accused 2, 4 and 6. He gave accused 3 the benefit of doubt as the evidence of the witnesses regarding his presence not corroborated by other evidence. The courts below found that there could be no-mistake about the identity of accused 1 and 5. With regard to their identity, the veracity of Amar Singh was not shaken and the evidence of the three other eyewitnesses was consistent positive and unimpeachable. Accused I made a disclosure statement and pointed out a place near the bank of the canal about amile or a mile and a half from the place where the trunk of the dead body had been found. Four pieces of teeth, one piece of skull bone and hair recovered from the place pointed out by accused I were found to be of human origin. There is reasonto believe that the severed head of the victim was cut to pieces at the spot. A kirpan was also recovered in consequence of the disclosure statement made by accused 1, but the High Court placed no reliance on this discovery as it was not known to whom the place of recovery belonged. A chaddar was recovered from accused 1 at the time of his arrest. The chaddar had been washed but on examination by the chemical examiner and seriologist it was found that it had stains of human blood. Both accused 1 and 5 had a strongmotivefor the murder. Though the courts below discarded a part of the prosecution story and gave the benefit of doubt to four accused, they were justified in accepting the prosecution case regarding the participation of accused 1 and 5 in the attack on the victim. The Sessions Judge convicted accused 1 and 5 of the offences under ss. 302 and 201 read with s. 149 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to death and five years rigorous imprisonment.The High Court altered the convictions to those under ss. 302 and 20 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code and confirmed the sentences. Accused 1 and 5 have now filed this appeal to this Court.

The High Court recorded the following finding: ,lm15

"The finding, therefore, in concurrencewith

that of the learned trial Judge, is that six

persons, of whom appellant Dyal Singh of Dalla

was armed with a spear and was riding on a

mare and the five others were armedwith

Kirpans,including appellant Jagir Singh of

Purana Pind, arrived at the threshing floor of

Amar Singh P.W. 1, that there Tarlok Singh

deceased received injuries at their 259

hands, a particular injury in the head region

having been caused by appellant Jagir Singh of

Purana Pind, that when Tarlok Singh deceased

was almost dead or near death, his deadbody

was placed on the mare in front of appellant

Dyal Singh of Dalla, and six culprits, includ-

ing the two appellants, then left the

threshing floortowards the nearby canal

minor, and that at a distance of about one

mile from the village on the bank of the canal

minor the body of Tarlok Singh deceased was

thrown on the ground, the head was cutoff,

and while appellant Dyal Singh of Dalla and

another culprit carried the head on the mare,

the remaining four culprits accompanied them,

and thus all the six culprits, including the

two appellants, escaped.So the six culprits,

including the two appellants came together

armed, committed the murder of Tarlok Singh

deceased, were together when his head was cut

off and then departed together with thehead

of Tarlok Singh deceased being carried by

appellant Dyal Singh of Dalla and another on a

mare. It is obvious that what was done by all

the six persons, including the two appellants,

was done in furtherance of their common

intention to murder Tarlok Singh deceased,

which common intention was carried outwith

determination and it is a caseof gruesome

murder.It is a clear case to which sec. 34

applied...... Taking into consideration the

manner and method of murder of Tarlok Singh

deceasedby the appellants and theirfour

companions as a whole from start to theend,

the appellants, about whose identity there is

no manner of doubt whatsoever, cannot escape

the consequences of the act of all the six

persons merely because in the case of three of

those who have been acquittedthe learned

Judge has not been satisfied as to their

identity and the fourth he has acquitted on a

consideration that as no corroboration is

available as to him of the witnesses he may be

given the benefit of doubt. The matter might

have been different if the learned Judge had

disbelieved the witnesses with regard to those

four persons, but this he has not done." The charge against the six accusedincluding the two appellants was that they were members ofan unlawful assembly whose common object was to commit the murder of TarlokSingh deceased and that they in prosecution ofthis commonobject committed the murder. The materials on the recordshow clearly that the murder was committed by six culprits including the two appellants in furtherance of the commonintention of all. In the circumstances, though the appellants were charged of an offence under ss. 302/149, they could be convicted under ss. 302/34. No prejudice was L5Sup.CI/67-4 260 causedto the appellants by the alteration of the charge from an offence under ss. 302/149 to one under s. 302/34. The contention of the appellants is that in a case where six named accused persons, A, B, C, D, E and F are charged under s. 302 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code for committing the murder of G and the evidence is directed to establish that the said six persons have taken part in the murderand it is not known who gave the fatal blow, on the acquittal of C, D, E and F the remaining two accused A and B cannot be convicted of the offence under s. 302 read with s. 34. We are unable to agree with this contention. As it is not known that A or B gave the fatal blow they cannot be convicted under s. 302. Nor is it possible to find that A and Btogether with C, D, E and F jointly committed the murder. Since C, D, E and F have been acquitted of the chargethey could not have participated inthe murder. Unless the court can find that other unidentified assailants together with A and B took part in the murder, A and Bmust be acquitted of the offence under s. 302 read with s. 34. But if the court can, on a proper appraisal of the evidence find that there were six assailants,the witnesseswere mistaken as to the identity of C, D, E and F, andfour unknown culprits together with A and B took part in the murderin furtherance of the common intention of all, the court can convict A and B of the offence under s. 302read with s. 34. Though it is not known who gave the fatal blow, each of the assailants including A and B is responsible for the murder as if it was committed by him alone. In Bharwad Mepa Dana and another v. State of Bombay(1) 12 named persons including the two appellants were charged with offences under s. 302 read with ss. 149 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code. The Sessions Judge acquitted seven of the accused but convicted five under s. 302 read with s. 149 and s. 302 read with s. 34. On appeal, the High Court acquitted one of the five convicted personsbut maintained the conviction and sentence of the appellants and the two others. The High Court held that there were ten to thirteen persons in the unlawful assembly though the identity of all the persons except four had not been established, all these persons had the common object and the common intention ,of killing the victims and the killing was done in prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly and in furtherance of the common intention of all. This Court affirmed the convictions and sentences. It held that there was no difficulty in the application of s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code as the number of the convicted persons wasfour and there was a clear finding that they shared the common intention with some others whoseidentity was not established. Even if it was not known which parti(1) [4960]2 S.C.R. 172 261 cular person or persons gave the fatal blows, owe itwar. found that the murders were committed in furtherance of the commonintention of all, each one of all suchpersons was liableas though the murders had been committed by him alone.Section 34 is intended to meet a case where members of a party acted in furtherance of the common intention of all but it was difficult to prove exactly the part played by each of them.The principle which the section embodies is the participation insome action with the intention of committing a crime; once such participation isestablished, s. 34 is at once attracted.

The case of Prabhu Babaji Navle v. State of Bombay(1) is distinguishable. There the appellant Was charged under S. 302 read with s. 34 with four named persons. The,four otherswere acquitted. This Court held that the appellant alone could not be convicted of the offence under s. 302 read with S. 34. On the facts of that case,it was not possible to reach a conclusion that the appellant shared a common intention with other unknown person or persons. The case of Krishna Govind Patil v. State of Maharashtra(2) is also distinguishable. Them,four accused personswere charged unders. 302 read with S. 34. The High Court acquitted accused 1,3 and 4 on the ground that it was doubtful whether anyone of them participated in the commission of the offence and yet convicted accused 2 on the groundthat one or more of them might have participated in the offence.The finding recorded by the High Court was legally impossible. Having found that accused 1, 3 and 4 did not take part in the offence, the High Court could not find that one or more of them might have participated in the offence with accused 2. There was not a single observation in the judgment of the High Court to indicate that any person or persons other than the named accusedparticipated in the offence. In these circumstances, this Court set aside the conviction of accused 2.

In the present case, the Courts below have recorded the clear findingthat accused 1 and 5 participated in the offence with four other unknown culprits. Though six named persons were charged with the offence, there was a mistake in the identity of three of the accused and with regard to another accused, thebenefit of doubt was given as no independent corroboration was available. But it admits of no doubt that Tarlok Singhwas attacked and brutally -murdered on April 27, 1965 by six culprits. Accused 1 and 5 were two of the six culprits who participated in the attack. The murder was committed by six culprits including accused 1 and 5 in furtherance of the common intention of all. Accused 1 and 5 shared the common intention with the four other culprits whose identity has not been established. Though it is not known which

(1) A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 51.

(2) [1964] 1 S.C.R. 678. 262 particular person or persons gave the fatal blow it is clear that the murder was committed by six culprits including accused 1 and 5 in furtherance of the common intention of all and each of them is liable for the murder as though it had been committed by him alone.

Accused 1 and 5 were rightly convicted of the offence under s. 302 read with S. 34 of the Indian Penal Code. The murder was ruthless and cold-blooded. There are no extenuating circumstances.They were rightly sentenced to death.They were also rightly convicted and sentenced forthe offence under s. 201 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code. The appeal is dismissed.

Y.P. Appeal

dismissed. 263
**********
CROSS CITATION
1968 SC 832 (9)
1959 SCR 1210

CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal

Appeal No. 77 of 1958.

Appealby special leave from the judgment andorder dated February 26, 1958, of the Punjab High Courtin Criminal Appeal No. 860 of 1957, arising out 155 1220 of the judgment and order dated December 23, 1957, of the Additional Sessions Judge at Ambala in Sessions No. 20 of 1957 and Trial No. 32 of 1957.

Harnam Singh and Sadhu Singh, for the appellant. Har Parshad and T. M. Sen, for the respondent. 1958. September 2. The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

IMAM J.-The appellant and one Prem were tried for the murder of Nirmala Devi, wife of Banwari Lal, a Practising lawyer at Rupar.The appellant was sentenced to death while Prem was sentenced to imprisonment for life. The appellant andPrem appealed against their conviction and sentence to theHigh Court of Punjab. Their appeals were dismissed and their conviction and sentence were affirmed by theHigh Court. The appellantobtained from this Court special leave to appealand in the present appeal the only question for consideration is whether the appellant was rightly convicted and sentenced for the murder of Nirmala Devi.The case of Prem is not before us.

At Rupar, Banwari Lal practised as a lawyer. His wife, the deceased Nirmala Devi lived with him there with their child, eight months old. With them also lived --Banwari Lal's sister Vina, a girl of about 16 to 17 years of age. Banwari Lal had employed Prem as a servant about four months before the murder of Nirmala Devi on February 12, 1957. ThisPrem was a youngster of about fourteen years of age at that time. According to the prosecution, lie was an associate of the appellant who was posted at Rupar in the capacity of a footconstable in the police force. Theappellant andPrem became friendly and it is said that the appellant had an eye on the ornaments of the deceased Nirmala Devi, which she was in the habit of wearing when she went out. The deceased was a young person in her twenties and of good character. She used to be left alone in the house with herchild,when Banwari Lal went to court and Vina went to school. Prem, however, used to remain at the house. It is the case of the prosecution that the appellant in 1221 conspiracy with Prem took advantage of the deceased being alone in the house, when the appellant went upstairs and killedNirmala Devi and stole her ornaments, whilePrem remained down-stairs with her child. Vina had returned from schoolround about, 12-30 in the afternoon as it was the recesstime. At that time Nirmala Devi was in the drawing room feeding her child. Prem was also at the house atthat time.Vina again returned to the house at about 3-45p.m. She enquired from Prem as to where Nirmala Devi was and was told by him that he did not know as he himself hadbeen absentfrom the house. Vina, thereafter, went upstairs to the kitchen to take her food. Banwari Lal had returned from court at about 3-15 p.m., earlier than usual, as he had to attend an election meeting at the Municipal Office. He was accompanied by a pleader Sudarshan Kumar Jain who was going to Chandigarh. He had intended to give him a cup oftea, but finding the door leading through the staircase to the residential portion looked and thinking that his wife was not at home, lie and his friend left for the Municipal Hall. Banwari Lal returned to his house at about 4-45 p.m. He enquired from Prem as to where his wife was and was informed by him that she had gone out. He went upstairs and saw his sisterVina eating her food. On opening the drawing room, however, Banwari Lal was stunned to find his wife lying dead on the floorin a pool of blood. lie noticed several injuries on her and that some of her jewellery was missing. He proceeded to the police station almost opposite to his house and lodged a First Information Report about the murder at 5 p.m.

There can be no manner of doubt that an audacious and a brutal murder of a young and a defenceless person had taken place with the intention of robbing her of her ornaments. The fact of murder has been apply proved and has notbeen seriously questioned. The only matter for consideration is Whether the evidence established that the deceased Nirmala Devi was murdered by the appellant with the assistance of Prem.

The evidence upon which the prosecution relied for 1222 conviction is the confession of Prem, the statement of the appellant which led to therecovery of the ornaments belonging to Nirmala Devi from the possession of one Raj Rani a mistress of the appellant, the recovery of a bloodstained dagger from his belongings at the police station and his conduct after the murder.

So far as the confession of Prem was concerned, it was retracted by him in the Court of Session. Prem's statement under s. 342 to the Committing Magistrate, however, which had been brought on to the record under s. 287 of theCode of Criminal Procedure, clearly stated that the confession was a voluntary one. Indeed, his statement to the Committing Magistrate showed that the crime was committed by the appellantand that Prem had assistedhim in the commission of that crime. Although in the Court of Session Prem had retracted his confession, his memorandum of appeal in the High Court would indirectly suggest that theconfession made by him was voluntary and true. Before we consider whether the confession was a voluntary and atrue one, it is necessary to deal with the submission on behalf of the appellant that the confession, having been retracted by Prem, is irrelevant so far as the appellant is concerned as the retracted confession of an accused cannot beused against his co-accused.

Although on behalf of the appellant it had not been argued that the retracted confession of Prem was inadmissible, we regardthe submission that it was irrelevant and cannot be used against the appellant as tantamount to saying thesame thing.Section 30 of the Indian Evidence Act states: " When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same offence, and a confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons is proved, the Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other person as well as against the person who makes such confession."

It will be clear from the terms of this section that where more persons than one are being tried jointly for thesame offence, a confession made by any one of them affecting himself and any one of his co-accused 1223 can be takeninto consideration by the court notonly against the maker of the confession but also against his coaccused. TheEvidence Act nowhere provides that if the confession is retracted, it cannot betakeninto consideration againstthe co-accused or the confessing accused. Accordingly, the provisions of the Evidence Act do not prevent the Court from taking into consideration a retracted confession against the confessing accused and his co-accused. Not a single decision of any of the courts in India was placed before usto show thata retracted confession was not admissible in evidence or that it was irrelevant as against a co-accused. An examination of the reported decisions of the various High Courts in India indicates that the preponderance of opinion is in favour of the view that although it may be taken into consideration against a co-accused by virtue of the provisions of s. 30 of the Indian Evidence Act, its value was extremely weak and there could be no conviction with out thefullest and strongest corroboration on material particulars. The corroboration in the full sense implies corroboration not only as to the factum of the crime but also as to the connection ofthe (co-accused with that crime. In our opinion, there appears to be considerable justification for this view. The amount of credibility to be attached to a retracted confession, however, would depend upon the circumstances of each particular case.Although a retracted confession is admissible against a co-accused by virtue of s. 30 of the Indian Evidence Act, as a matterof prudence and practice a court would not ordinarily act upon it to convict a co-accused without corroboration. On this basis it is now to be seen whether the confession was voluntary and true. It will then be necessary to consider whether the confession has received full and strong corroboration in material particularsboth as to the crime and the appellant's connection with that crime.

It was strongly urged that the police had adopted a device to get the accused Prem into their custody again on a charge of theft as lie had already been placed in the judicial lock-up after his arrest in 1224 connection with the murder of the deceased Nirmala Devi. He was arrested on June 25, 1957, in connection with a burglary which had taken place on December 5, 1956, and he hadbeen since then in police custody in connection with the investigation of that case until July 10, 1957, the last day of remand to police custody. On July 10, 1957, Prem made a confession before a Magistrate concerning the murder of Nirmala Devi.Prem was discharged in the burglary case on July 20, 1957. Having adopted this device of gettingPrem into police custody the police were in aposition to exercise great influence upon Prem, a, young' lad of about 14 years of age. When lie made his confession on July 10, 1957, he must have been still labouring under the influence of the police and sufficient time was not given by the Magistrate to remove that influence. The Magistrate ought not to have recorded his confession on July 10, 1957. He ought to have remanded Prem to jail custody for a fewdays in order that the police influence may be removed from his mind. We have examined the record and find no justification for the suggestion made that the police adopted a device to got the accused Prem in to their custody again by arresting him in the burglary case of December 5, 1956.It istrue that the accused Prem was discharged from the burglarycase on July 20, 1957, but there is nothing on the present record to suggest that his arrest in the burglary case of December 5, 1956, was without justification and that it wasdone purelyfor the purpose of getting him backinto police custody. It is true that Prem had been in police custody from June 25, 1957 to July 10, 1957,and the Magistrate might as well have refrained from recording his confession on July 10, 1957. It is clear, however, from the record of the Magistrate that at 1 p.m. the accused Prem was produced before him by the police for the recording of his confession. The Magistrate told him that lie was not a policeofficer but a Magistrate and that he was at liberty to think over the matter whether he would volunteer tomake a confession and gave him time, until 2 p.m. forthis purpose. He further explained to Prem that he should 1225 consider himself quite free and not make a statement under the influenceor temptation of anybody. At2 p.m. the Magistrate took various precautions. All the doors and the windows of his room were closed. Everyone, except Prem, was turned out. The police were asked to stand in the verandah from where they could not see Prem. Prem was againtold that he must regard himself as quite free and should not be under the influence of the police oranybody else. The Magistrate then put a series of questions which havebeen recorded in the form of questions and answers.By question 7, the Magistrate enquired how long Prem had been in police custody and from where he bad been brought that day, to which,the answer was that some 5 months back he hadbeen arrested since then sometimes he had been sent to jail and sometimes had been kept in police custody. Byquestion 8, the Magistrate asked whether he was kept awake duringthat period or had been given greased diet (Mnaggan giza, etc.), which we understand to mean whether he had been given greasy food which would induce a sleepy condition in persons eating such food, to which question he replied that he had enjoyed regular sleepand had been taking common diet. At the beginning, of course, the police had kept himawake. The Magistrate also enquired whether the police or any other person had made any promise or had given any undertaking to help Prem orhad given alltemptation tohim or had influenced or frightened him. If so, he should statethis fully from his heart, to which Prem replied that he had not been given any promise, temptation or inducement, nor was he subjected to fear or exhortation. He had been merely asked to make a true statement. Prem then said that he would make his statement of his own free will and the Magistrate could believe him or not. The Magistrate also asked Prem whether any one had beaten him or if there was any mark of injury on his body, to which, the answer was 'no'. The Magistrate then examined the body of Prem and found that there was no mark of injury on his person. The Magistrate then asked as to why he was making a confession, to which, Prem answered 1226 that he was doing so of his own free will and to lessen the burdenof his heart. The nature of the questions put and the manner in which the Magistrate examined Prem clearly showedthat the Magistrate took every precaution to be satisfied whether Prem was going to makea voluntary statement. We are satisfied that during the period of policecustody between the 25th of June and July 10, 1957, Prem was not induced to make a confession. He made the confession voluntarily. That the confession was voluntary finds supportfrom Prem's statement to the Committing Magistrate under s. 342 of the Code of' Criminal Procedure. In that statement Prem told the Magistrate in answer to various questions the following story: He had been employed as a domestic servant by the lawyer Banwari Lal. He had developed during this period friendship with the appellant. The appellanthad told him that he would commit rape on Nirmala Devi and would rob her of her ornaments and, if she resisted, he would murder her.He informed the appellant on February 11, 1957, that Nirmala -Devi would be alone in her house at about mid -day on February12, 1957. He had received on February 11, 1957, a dagger wrapped in a pajama from the appellant and bad kept it in the store behind the office of Banwari Lal On February 12, 1957, he informed the appellant that Nirmala Devi was alone in the house. He had handedover the dagger and the pajama to the appellant on February 12, after taking it out of the store room. The appellant hadsought his assistance in the commission of rape, robberyand murder of Nirmala Devi and he hadbeen promised a half share in the booty. To the question whether he had kept watch over the house of Banwari Lal when the appellant entered it for committing rape, robbery and murder of Nirmala Devi, Prem answered that he was made to stand near the stair-case by the appellant and that he kept watch while the appellant committed the crime.He finally admitted to the Committing Magistrate that the confession which had been recorded on July 10, 1957, wasa voluntary confession. When asked whether he had to say anything else, Prem told the Committing 1227 Magistrate that he had made a true statement before him and also in the Court of the Magistrate who had recorded his confession. Shorn of details the substance of the story told by Prem to the Committing Magistrate is in keeping with the substance of his confession recorded on July 10, 1957. It is to be further remembered that the statement of Prem to the Committing Magistrate was brought on to the record of the Court of Session under s. 287 of the Codeof Criminal Procedure which directs that the statement should be read as evidence. Although Prem retracted the confession in the Court of Session, his memorandum of appeal filed in the High Court showed that he had acted under the influence of the appellant and had been allured by him to achieve his object. He, however, pleaded that be should not have receivedsuch severepunishment. On the contrary, lie should havebeen acquitted. These circumstances clearly indicate that the confession recorded on July 10, 1957, wasa voluntary confession. It remains now to be seen whether it was a truthful confession.

Prem assertedin his confession that he hadacquaintance with the appellant previous to the appellant's posting to Rupar and their association continued at Rupar. There is nothing inherently improbable in this story of Prem. It is true that there is not much evidence to corroborate Prem. that lie andthe appellant were acquainted and used to associate. Banwari Lal had seen them talking to each other once or twice before the murder. The police station at which the appellant was posted was almost opposite to the house of Banwari Lal where Prem was employed as a servant and there was every probability of the appellant andPrem meeting. It is significant that on the day of murder of Nirmala Devi,in the afternoon, Prem was present in the compound of the police station with a child in a perambulator.Foot-constableGurbachan Singh, P.W. 4, enquired from Prem as to why he had gone inside the police station. On this the appellant asked Gurbachan Singh not to remonstrate with Prem as he was a mere, boy. Gurbachan 156 1228 Singh had stated that previously he had never seenPrem going inside the police station with a perambulater. The intervention of the appellant suggests that he knew Prem and was friendly towards him. Prem's story that he was employed as a servant by Banwari Lal is corroborated by the evidence of Banwari Lal himself, his sister Vina and his clerk Naranjan Das. In the nature of things there could be no corroboration of Prem's story about the appellant's proposal to rape and rob Nirmala Devi and, if necessary, to murder her. According to Prem's confession a day before the murder he had been given a dagger by the appellant along with a _pajama and that Prem took the pajama and the dagger to the upper storey of Banwari Lal's house having concealed it in the kothri of firewood which was near the office room of Banwari Lal. This part of his story receives corroboration from the evidence of Banwari Lal that after the murder he had found a blood-stained pajama, Exbt. P. 14, banging on the door of the store room which is at the back of the residential portion of the house. Banwari Lal is supported by Nand Lal, P.W. 34, Motor Mobile Patrol Sub-Inspector, who recorded the First Information of Banwari Lal.According to him, he found the pajama hanging on one of the shutters of an almirah fixed in the wall in the fuel room situate at the back of the room where Nirmala Devi was foundlying dead. It was bloodstained. Banwari Lal had clearlystatedthat this pajama did not belong to him or any one in his house. The existenceof the pajama in Banwari Lal'shouse lends corroboration to the story of Prem that he had been given this pajama and that he had concealed it in the kothri of fire-wood near the office of Banwari Lal. The statement of Prem that hehad asked Raj sabziwala to bring down the perambulator of the child and that he did so, finds corroboration from the evidence of Gurbachan Singh that in the afternoon he found Prem accused in the police station with a child in a perambulator.

The presence of the accused Prem at Banwari Lal's house near about the time of the murder appears to 1229 be clear. When Vina had left for herschool at 9-45 a.m., Prem was in the house. Vina returned to the house from her school at about 12-30 noon. At that time Prem was present in the verandah in front of the office. When she finally returned from the school at about 3-45 p.m., apparently Prem was not in the house but arrived shortly thereafter. The murder was committed at any time between 12-30 p.m. and 2-15 p.m. if the appellant was the murderer, because Gurbachan Singh's evidence showed that the appellant was at the thana at 2-15 p.m. Apparently, the appellant went out with Gurbachan Singh and returned to the thana with him in time for Gurbachan Singh to be on duty from 3 p.m. If the appellant was the murderer he must have committed the murder before2-15 p.m. Nirmala Devi was alive at 12-30 p.m.when Vina saw her feeding her child. Assuming that Vina did not stay long, as she had come to get some money to purchase a copy-book, itwould not be unreasonable toassumethat Nirmala Devi was alive up to 12-40or 12-45 p.m. The interval of time between that and 2-15 p.m., when the appellant wasseen at the police station, is about 1 1/2 hours.It would be probable that during this time Prem was present in the house and when he says that lie was present there there is no inherent improbability in his statement. At 3-45 p.m., when Vina arrived, no doubt Prem was not in the house, but he came shortly thereafter and Vina took from him the child of Nirmala Devi.This clearly shows that Prem had gone out of the house with the child of NirmalaDevi which one would not normally expect him to do at thattime of the day, if Nirmala Devi had left the house to do shopping or to visit anyone.If Nirmala Devi was in the house and alive it was most unlikely that Prem accused would have taken her child out of the house. Prem's statement that he was amusing the child while the appellant was doing his nefarious work appears to be true, because the child was with him and he had been seen at the police station with a child in a perambulator. If the circumstances tend toshow that in all probability Prem was in the house from 12-30 p.m. to 2-15 p.m. then his 1230 story that he was present at the house when the appellant came there appears to be a truthful statement. It is significant that when Vina arrived at the house at 3-45 p.m. she found the door of the stair-caselocked. WhenPrem arrived she saw the key in his hand, although Prem hadsaid it was lying on the floor. He opened the lock of thedoor of the stair-case with that key and Vinia went upstairs to the second floor where she went to the kitchen and took her food.When Banwari Lal arrived at his house at about3-15 p.m. he found his office room locked from outside. He wanted to go to the residential portion for taking tea, but found the door of the stair-case locked from outside. Finding the door of the stair-case leading to the residential portion of his house locked, he came down and went away in connection with the election work. On his returnhe enquired from Prem about the whereabouts of his wife and Prem told him that she had gone out. He wished to go upstairs to the residential portion of the house and Prem at his request opened the lock of the stair-case, the key being with him. According to Banwari Lal, the usual practice was to lock the door of the office which adjoins the stair-case and to bolt the other door from inside, but on the day of the murder the door adjoining the stair-case was looked while the other door was lying open. Banwari Lal's clerk, Naranjan Das, came to the house at 4-15 or 4-30 p.m. He went up to the verandah in front of the office and found both the doors of the office locked from outside. He asked Prem to open the office, but Prem told him that the key of one of the locks which wasfixed on thedoor adjoining the stair-case, had been lost. He gave the key of the other lock and then Prem took out a key from his pocket and opened the lock fixed on the other door of the office. There is no reason to distrust all this evidence which would indicate thatafter Vina had left the house on her first visit at about 12-30 p.m. the two doors werelockedfrom outside which was something unusual and that the keys of the looks of these doors were with Prem. He had given evasive answers about the keys to Vinia and Naranjan Das 1231 while the key was in his pocket. These circumstancesalso indicate the truthfulness of Prem's statement that he was present in the house during the period in which Nirmala Devi was murdered. His statement in the confession that the appellant had locked the door and had thrown the key in tile officeverandah and that while he sat there, the child, while playing, picked up the key and that he said to the girl (presumably Vina) there was the key and then he unlockedthe door appears to be true. Reference insome detailto the various statements of Prem in the confession and the circumstances proved by the evidence of various witnesses became necessary in order to ascertain whether Prem had made a truthful statement about his presence at the house during the period in which Nirmala Devi was murdered and also as to the part he had played in assisting the appellant to commit the murder. While it is true that in the confession Prem does not attribute tohimself any participation in the murder itself, it is not to beforgotten that the murder of Nirmala Devi could not have taken place without his aid.Whoever entered the house of Banwari Lal in broad day light could not have gone upstairs without the knowledgeand cooperation of Prem. According to his statement lie knew what was the intention of the appellant and to assist him in the accomplishment of his purpose he had concealedin his master's house the pajama and the daggergiven to himby the appellant. Ifhe did not actually participate in the murder he would be equally guiltyof the murder if that murder was committed with his aid and his connivance. The confession, as a whole, concerning the murder of the deceased appears to us to be true and we have no hesitation, after a very careful consideration of all the circumstances appearing in the case, in saying so. In our opinion, Prem's confession was not only voluntary and true but it had been corroborated in material particulars regarding the general story told by him in his confession. The other question which now remains for consideration is whether the confession received material corroboration connecting the appellant with the murder of Nirmala Devi. 1232 Amongst the appellant's possessions a dagger was recovered which appeared to be blood-stained but owing to thelong delay in sending it to the Chemical Examiner its origin could not bedetermined. From the medicalevidence it appears that the dagger in question could have inflicted the kind of injuries suffered by Nirmala Devi. Themost important corroboration, however, is the recovery of the ornaments of the deceased. These ornaments, according to Banwari Lal, she had been wearing on the day of the murder when he leftfor court. On some statement made by the appellant his mistress RajRani was visited by the authorities and in the presence of respectable witnesses some ornaments were recovered and they were identified as the ornamentsof the deceased. The evidence of RajRani also showed that these ornaments were given to her by the appellant. She apparently had no reason to depose against the appellant, because she had said in her evidence that she wishedto meet the appellant before giving clue to the ornaments and that she wished to give the ornaments to the police in his presence. The defence case was not that these ornaments did not belong to the deceased but that, on the contrary, they were hers but had been produced by Banwari Lal during the police investigation and that it was falsely alleged that they had been recovered from Raj Rani. The evidence of Charan Dass, P. W. 24, President of the Municipal Committee of Rupar, however, clearly shows that in his presence the appellant made a statement to the police to the effect that one gold kara and seven goldbangles had been given by him to Raj Rani. This statement was made on August3, 1957. His evidence also shows that on August 9, 1957, he accompanied the police party from Rupar to Jangpura and that Raj Rani took them to her sister'shouse. She brought out a trunk from inside the room. She opened the lock of the trunk and produced from it a tin box which contained a gold kara and seven gold bangles. The evidence of GoriShanker, a Municipal Commissioner of Rupar is to the same effect and corroborated Charan Dass. The courts below believed these two witnesses. We have examined 1233 their evidence with some care in view of the submission on behalf of the appellant that they should not be relied upon. There is nothing in their evidence to show that they were in any way hostile to the appellant or had any motive to depose against him.The courts below having believed these witnesses, we would not ordinarily go behind their view on a question of fact. Having regard, however, to theconsequences which arise as a result of the acceptance of their evidence in this particular case, we have examined their evidence in the light of the submission made on behalf of the appellant. It was suggested that at the earlier stage the police investigation was not properly conducted and the publicwere dissatisfied. A deputation of influential persons met the Chief Minister as a result of which amore activeand thorough investigation took place. It may be that influential persons of Rupar interviewed the Chief Minister, being dissatisfied with the manner in which the investigation was taking place. There is, however, nothing to show that Charan Dass or Gori Shanker were amongst those who had interviewed the Chief Minister or that they had taken part in any agitation against the police concerning the manner of the investigation. It is difficult to believe that two responsible persons such as the President of the Municipal Committee and one of its members would go out of their way to depose to certain events which would provide very strong evidence against the appellant and lead to his conviction on a capital charge, unless they had really heard the statement of the appellant and witnessed the recovery as deposed to by them. It was then suggested that, apparently, CharanDass had no real reason to go to the police station on August 3, 1957, and, therefore, his story that he heard the appellant make the statement which led to the recovery of the ornaments was false.CharanDass, however, had statedthe reason for his visiting the police station. He went there to complain to the policethat people parked their push-carts in the bazar and thus obstructed the passage. In our opinion, as the President of the Municipal Committee of Rupar, if a nuisance was 1234 being createdby people parking their push-carts in the bazar,it was a natural thing for him to go to the police station in order to get such obstruction removed and for the policeto see that the nuisance did not continue. We can find nothing strange in the conduct of Charan Dass orGori Shanker in having gone to the police station in the circumstances deposed to by them. We have no hesitation in believing the evidence of Charan Dass and Gori Shankerthat the appellantmade a statement to the effect that he had given one gold kara and seven gold bangles to Raj Rani and that the same were recovered fromRaj Rani in their presence. It would appear, therefore, on theevidence of Raj Rani and these witnesses, that not long after the murder of Nirmala Devi the appellant was in possession of her ornaments andthat he had given them to Raj Rani. The ornaments being in possession of the appellant soon after the murder would show that he either stole the ornaments or was in possession of them knowing or having reason to believe that they were stolen properties. Nirmala Devi had been murderedby someone who had stolen her ornaments. According to the confession of Prem it was the appellant who had gone up-stairs where Nirmala Devi was Sometime after the departure of Vina. He had given the appellant the pajama and the dagger. Thereafter, the appellant left the house leaving the pajama behind. After the departure of the appellant no outsider entered the house. It is clear, therefore, that in order to steal the ornaments the thief killedNirmala Devi.The circumstances clearly indicate that the thief was no other than the appellant. It seems to us, therefore, that the confession of Prem receives strong and substantial corroboration connecting the appellantwith the crime of the murder of the deceased Nirmala Devi. The conduct of the appellant from 2-15 p.m. onwards clearly shows that he was in a disturbed state of mind which is consistent with his having committed the crime, It is curious that lie was uttering the word I Nirmala. It had been suggested to Gurbachan Singh that the AssistantSubInspector Rikhi Ram had a 1235 daughter with whom the appellant had illicit connection and that her name was Nirmala, but the witness stated that he had no knowledge about it. The appellant in his statement under s. 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure before the Sessions Judge admitted that he was shouting out the name of Nirmala but he had a love affair with a girl named Nirmala, daughter of Rikhi Ram. We are not prepared to accept the explanation of the appellant as to how he wascalling out the name of Nirmala so soon after the murder of Nirmala Devi. This conduct of the appellant may not by itselfhave been corroboration of sufficient importance to enable a court to convict the appellant on the retracted confession of Prem. No stronger and no better corroboration, however, of the confession of Prem could be had than the evidence which showed that the appellant had been in possession of Nirmala Devi's ornaments soon after her murder. There were several comments made on the evidence by the learned Advocate for the appellant, but those commentswere with reference to unimportant matters and were not at all relevant. Inan appeal byspecial leaveit is not ordinarily permissible to make submissions on questions of fact.The principalmatterwith which we havebeen concerned in this appeal was whether the confession ofPrem had been corroborated in material particulars regarding the general storytold by him and in material particulars tending to connect the appellant with the murder of the deceased. Wehave no hesitation in saying that the confession ofPrem has been amply corroborated inboth respects. Recovery of the ornaments of the deceased at the instance of the appellant incriminated him tothe fullest extentand lent the strongest corroboration to theconfession of Prem from which it was apparent that no other person than the appellant could have murdered Nirmala Devi. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Appealdismissed. 157 1236
**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Penal Code, 1860
Section 149 – Ingredients of - Invocation of vicarious liability – Requirement for. Held, Section 149 consists of two parts. Where there is existence of common object and offence is done in prosecution thereof, offence falls under the first part. Where offence is not done in direct  prosecution of the common object, but all members of unlawful assembly know that offence is likely to be committed, it falls under the second part. Court has to see that all ingredients are fulfilled to hold each member of the assembly guilty. Once such a finding is reached, court would not enquire as to who actually did the offensive act or which of the members did which of the above two ingredients. Before recording conviction under Section 149 IPC, essential ingredients of Section 141 must be proved.
HELD
Let us consider the requirements for invoking the vicarious liability under Section 149 IPC. Section 149 IPC consists of two parts:  The first part of the section means that there exists common object and that the offence has been committed in prosecution of the common object. In order that the offence may fall within the first part, the offence must be connected immediately with the common object of the unlawful assembly of which the accused was member. The second part of the section means that even if the offence committed is not in direct prosecution of the common object of the assembly, it may yet fall under Section 149, if it can be shown that the offence was such as the members knew was likely to be committed. (Para 9)
Once the court finds that the ingredients of Section 149 IPC are fulfilled, every person who at the time of committing that offence was a member of the assembly has to be held guilty of that offence. After such a finding, it would not be open to the court to see as to who actually did the offensive act nor would it be open to the court to require the prosecution to prove which of the members did which of the above two ingredients. Before recording the conviction under Section 149 IPC, the essential ingredients of Section 141 IPC must be established. (Para 9.1)
Whether the members of the unlawful assembly really had the common object to cause the murder of the deceased has to be decided in the facts and circumstances of each case, nature of weapons used by such members, the manner and sequence of attack made by those members on the deceased and the circumstances under which the occurrence took place. It is an inference to be deduced from the facts and circumstances of each case. (Para 12)
Section 302/ 149, 3232/149, 324 - Common object to kill - A1, A2, A3 hurled bomb, killing deceased and injuring one - A4 to A10 attacked complainant party with sticks and sickles – No evidence to prove common object between members of unlawful assembly to murder - Whether members of the assembly knew that offence of murder is likely to be committed and thus, their acts fall under the second part of Section 149 IPC. Held, two factions had assembled to attend a funeral. A11 had enmity with PW2’s family. At his exhortation, accused reacted individually. A4 to A10 might not have been aware that A1 to A3 were armed with bomb and murder would be committed. They had no intention to kill as they were carrying sickles and sticks and they did not cause injuries on any vital parts of body. No definite finding if there was common object to murder or members knew that murder was likely to be committed. Hence A4 to A10 cannot be convicted under Section 302/149. Since A4 and A5 had attacked PWs. on their left shoulders with sickles, they are convicted under Section 324. Sentence of A6 to A10 under Section 323/149 is modified to one under Section 323 IPC.
HELD
Let us consider whether the act of the accused falls under the second part of Section 149 IPC. As members of the unlawful assembly, whether the accused knew that the offence of murder is likely to be committed. It is a matter of evidence that Sahayam's house is situated next to the house of Jesu, for whose funeral, the two factions have assembled. Accused Nos. 4 to 10 may not have had the knowledge that Jesu Adimai (A1), Selvaraj (A2) and Sahayam (A3) were armed with bombs and that the murder of Kennedy was likely to be committed. On the exhortation of Joseph (A11), the accused seem to have individually reacted. There is no definite finding of the High Court that the common object of the assembly was to commit the murder or that the accused persons had knowledge that the offence of murder was likely to be committed and hence, the conviction of the accused Nos. 4 to 10 under Section 302 IPC with the aid of Section 149 IPC cannot be sustained. (Para 16)
Since the prosecution has not succeeded in establishing and proving that there was an unlawful assembly with a common object to commit the offence, conviction of the accused Nos. 3 to 5 (under Section 148 IPC) and accused Nos. 6 to 11 (under Section 147 IPC) are set aside. (Para 21)
Murder case – Evaluation of material on record by Apex Court. Held, Apex Court does not, by special leave convert itself into an appellate court to appreciate evidence for third time, unless serious infirmity or perversity is shown. (Para 17)
Section 302 – Hurling of bomb by A1, A2 and A3, killing deceased and injuring others - Whether A3 cannot be convicted under Section 302 as other co-accused, A1 and A2 were acquitted under Section 27(2) and 27(3) of Arms Act. Held, sole reason of acquittal was non-obtaining of prior sanction from district Magistrate to prosecute them. Hence their acquittal is of no help to A3. (Para 18)
Section 302/ 34 - Murder – Common intention - Role of A3 - On exhortation of A11, A1 to A3 hurled bombs, killing deceased and injuring ‘R’ – Bomb hurled by A1 hit deceased and that hurled by A2 hit 'R' on the ankle - However, bomb hurled by A3 fell on the ground. Held, fact that A3 was carrying bomb, shows sharing of common intention to kill. He is convicted under Section 302/34 and sentenced to life imprisonment.
HELD
On the exhortation of Joseph (A11), Jesu Adimai (A1) hurled the bomb which hit the forehead of deceased Kennedy. Selvam (A2) hurled the bomb which hit the right ankle of Raja. Bomb hurled by Sahayam (A3) fell on the floor and exploded. The bomb hurled by Selvaraj (A2) and Sahayam (A3), though, had not hit the deceased, the fact remains that they carried the bomb which clearly indicates that Sahayam (A3) was sharing the intention with Jesu Adimai (A1) and Selvaraj (A2) in committing the murder. Conviction of Sahayam (A3) under Section 302 IPC read with Section 149 IPC is modified as conviction under Section 302 IPC read with Section 34 IPC. (Para 20)
Section 302/149, 302/109 - Murder – Role of A11 - Apart from exhortation to hurl bombs and kill, no other overt act attributed – As per PW3 there was some dispute between family of PW2 and A11. Held, though no overt act was attributed to A11, yet words used by him to instigate clearly show that only after his exhortation all accused acted and mounted attack. His conviction under Section 302/149 cannot be sustained but same is modified to one under Section 302/109 IPC. Sentence of life imprisonment is confirmed. (Para 19)

CASES REFERRED
1.  Kuldip Yadav and Ors. v. State of Bihar [JT 2011 (4) SC 436] (Para 11.1)
2.  Daya Kishan v. State of Haryana [JT 2010 (4) SC 325] (Para 11.1)
3.  State of Punjab v. Sanjiv Kumar alias Sanju and Ors. [JT 2007 (9) SC 274] (Para 10.1)
4.  Rajendra Shantaram Todankar v. State of Maharashtra and Ors. [JT 2003 (2) SC 95] (Para 10)
5.  Ramanbhai Naranbhai Patel and others v. State of Gujarat [JT 1999 (9) SC 319] (Para 17)
6.  Rachamreddy Chenna Reddy and Ors. v. State of A.P. [JT 1999 (1) SC 412] (Para 12)
7.  Ranbir Yadav v. State of Bihar [JT 1995 (3) SC 228] (Para 12)
8.  Allauddin Mian and Others, Sharif Mian and Anr. v. State of Bihar [JT 1989 (2) SC 171] (Para 11)
9.  Lalji and Ors. v. State of U.P. [JT 1989 (1) SC 109] (Para 12)
10. Ramaniklal Gokaldas and Others v. State of Gujarat [1976 (1) SCC 6] (Para 17)


R. BANUMATHI, J.
1. These appeals arise out of the judgment dated 10.02.2011 passed by Madras High Court at Madurai Bench dismissing Criminal Appeal No.519 of 2002 thereby affirming the conviction of the appellants under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC, Sections 341, 324, 148, 147, 323 read with Section 149 IPC and Section 326 IPC and also the sentence of imprisonment imposed upon each of them.
2. Briefly stated case of prosecution is that on 12.01.1994, PW2-Anthony Mududhagam, deceased Luis John Kennedy and Raja came to attend funeral of one Jesu (PW2's cousin). While they were standing near Sahayam's (A3) house at about 3.05 p.m., Jesu Adimai (A1) (since dead), Selvaraj (A2) and Sahayam (A3) armed with country made bombs in their hands, Selvam (A4) and Antony Innasi (A5) armed with sickles, Charles (A6), Jerone (A7), Edwinson (A8), Raj (A9) and Elizabethan (A10) with sticks and Joseph (A11) came there and confronted the deceased Kennedy, PW2 and Suresh (PW1) [who just came there to see his father PW2]. Joseph (A11) instigated all the accused to attack on them. Selvam (A4) attacked PW1 with sickle on the left shoulder. Jesu Adimai (A1) threw one country bomb which hit the forehead of the deceased and the deceased fell down. Selvaraj (A2) threw the bomb which hit the right leg of Raja. Sahayam (A3) also threw a bomb which has fallen on the ground. Antony Innasi (A5) attacked PW2 on his left shoulder. Accused Nos.6 to 10 attacked Raja and PW2 indiscriminately causing injuries to them. On seeing the by-standers coming towards the spot, the accused ran away from the scene. Thereafter Johnson (PW-3) hired a tempo and took the injured to Nagercoil Kottar Government Hospital. On the way to hospital, Kennedy succumbed to injuries.
3. Based on the statement of Raja (Ex.P-16), FIR (Ex.P-9) was registered in Crime No.23/94 under Sections 147, 148, 326, 307 and 302 IPC as well as under the Indian Explosives Act. PW9-Krishnan Nair, Inspector in Charge had taken up the initial investigation and prepared rough sketch (Ex.P-10) of the place of occurrence and seized articles viz., blood stained earth (M.O.6) and sample earth (M.O.7) from the scene of crime and conducted the inquest (Ex.P11). PW6-Dr. Kutralingam conducted autopsy on the body of the deceased and noted "lacerated injury with burnt out black skin margins over the head both ocular areas; both eyes found to be missing; Face and forehead was seen seriously disfigured." PW6-Dr. Kutralingam opined that "the death was due to head injuries and the same could have been caused by explosion of bomb" and issued post-mortem certificate (Ex.P-6). On 15.01.1994, PW12-Ganesan Inspector of Police, took up further investigation and arrested the accused Nos. 2 to 10 on 25.01.1994 at about 04:45 a.m. Confession statement (Ex.P3) recorded from Selvam (A4) which led to recovery of sickle with wooden handle (M.O.2) and sickle with iron handle (M.O.3). On completion of investigation and submission of final report on 08.11.1995, all the accused were remanded to judicial custody.
4. To bring home the guilt of the accused, prosecution has examined witnesses (PWs 1 to 12) and marked nineteen exhibits (Ex.P-1 to Ex.P-19) and seven material objects (M.O.1 to M.O.7). The accused were questioned under Section 313 Cr. P.C. about the incriminating evidence and circumstances and the accused denied all of them. Upon consideration of evidence adduced by the prosecution, the trial court held that the prosecution has proved the existence of common object of the unlawful assembly and that the accused acted in furtherance of the common object and convicted all the eleven accused under Section 302 IPC with the aid of constructive liability under Section 149 IPC and sentenced all of them to undergo life imprisonment. The accused were also convicted for various other offences and were sentenced to undergo various imprisonment. Being aggrieved by the verdict of conviction and sentence imposed upon them, the accused preferred appeal before the High Court which came to be dismissed by the High Court by the impugned judgment.
5. Taking us through the evidence and the impugned judgment, learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the prosecution has failed to prove the common object of the unlawful assembly to cause the death of deceased Kennedy that the accused acted in furtherance of the common object. It was contended that the appellants should not have been convicted for causing murder of Kennedy with the aid of Section 149 IPC. The learned counsel emphasized that the prosecution has failed to prove existence of common object of the unlawful assembly and that the appellants knew that death of Kennedy was likely to be caused by the unlawful assembly and therefore, the conviction of the appellants under Section 302 IPC with the aid of Section 149 IPC cannot be sustained.
6. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the State submitted that from the evidence adduced by the prosecution and the attending circumstances of the case, prosecution has clearly proved the existence of common object and the courts below rightly convicted the accused under Section 302 IPC with the aid of Section 149 IPC.
7. We have considered the rival contentions and perused the impugned judgment and materials on record.
8. The question falling for consideration is whether the prosecution succeeded in proving the existence of common object amongst the accused persons and whether the accused persons acted in prosecution of the common object and that the accused persons knew that the death was likely to be committed, to convict the accused under Section 302 IPC with the aid of Section 149 IPC.
9. Before we consider the testimony of the witnesses, let us consider the requirements for invoking the vicarious liability under Section 149 IPC. Section 149 IPC consists of two parts:
     l The first part of the section means that there exists common object and that the offence has been committed in prosecution of the common object. In order that the offence may fall within the first part, the offence must be connected immediately with the common object of the unlawful assembly of which the accused was member.
     l The second part of the section means that even if the offence committed is not in direct prosecution of the common object of the assembly, it may yet fall under Section 149, if it can be shown that the offence was such as the members knew was likely to be committed.
9.1. What is important in each case is to find out if the offence was committed to accomplish the common object of the assembly or was the one which the members knew to be likely to be committed. Once the court finds that the ingredients of Section 149 IPC are fulfilled, every person who at the time of committing that offence was a member of the assembly has to be held guilty of that offence. After such a finding, it would not be open to the court to see as to who actually did the offensive act nor would it be open to the court to require the prosecution to prove which of the members did which of the above two ingredients. Before recording the conviction under Section 149 IPC, the essential ingredients of Section 141 IPC must be established.
10. Scope of two parts of Section 149 IPC has been explained in Rajendra Shantaram Todankar v. State of Maharashtra and Ors. [JT 2003 (2) SC 95], this Court has explained Section 149 and held as under:
     "14. Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code provides that if an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every person who at the time of the committing of that offence, is a member of the same assembly is guilty of that offence. The two clauses of Section 149 vary in degree of certainty. The first clause contemplates the commission of an offence by any member of an unlawful assembly which can be held to have been committed in prosecution of the common object of the assembly. The second clause embraces within its fold the commission of an act which may not necessarily be the common object of the assembly, nevertheless, the members of the assembly had knowledge of likelihood of the commission of that offence in prosecution of the common object. The common object may be commission of one offence while there may be likelihood of the commission of yet another offence, the knowledge whereof is capable of being safely attributable to the members of the unlawful assembly. In either case, every member of the assembly would be vicariously liable for the offence actually committed by any other member of the assembly. A mere possibility of the commission of the offence would not necessarily enable the court to draw an inference that the likelihood of commission of such offence was within the knowledge of every member of the unlawful assembly. It is difficult indeed, though not impossible, to collect direct evidence of such knowledge. An inference may be drawn from circumstances such as the background of the incident, the motive, the nature of the assembly, the nature of the arms carried by the members of the assembly, their common object and the behaviour of the members soon before, at or after the actual commission of the crime. Unless the applicability of Section 149 — either clause — is attracted and the court is convinced, on facts and in law, both, of liability capable of being fastened vicariously by reference to either clause of Section 149 IPC, merely because a criminal act was committed by a member of the assembly every other member thereof would not necessarily become liable for such criminal act. The inference as to likelihood of the commission of the given criminal act must be capable of being held to be within the knowledge of another member of the assembly who is sought to be held vicariously liable for the said criminal act...... " [underlining added]
10.1. The same principles have been reiterated in State of Punjab v. Sanjiv Kumar alias Sanju and Ors. [JT 2007 (9) SC 274].
11. Creation of vicarious liability under Section 149 IPC is well elucidated in Allauddin Mian and Others, Sharif Mian and Anr. v. State of Bihar [JT 1989 (2) SC 171], this Court held:
     "8. ........Therefore, in order to fasten vicarious responsibility on any member of an unlawful assembly the prosecution must prove that the act constituting an offence was done in prosecution of the common object of that assembly or the act done is such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of the common object of that assembly. Under this section, therefore, every member of an unlawful assembly renders himself liable for the criminal act or acts of any other member or members of that assembly provided the same is/are done in prosecution of the common object or is/are such as every member of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed. This section creates a specific offence and makes every member of the unlawful assembly liable for the offence or offences committed in the course of the occurrence provided the same was/were committed in prosecution of the common object or was/were such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed. Since this section imposes a constructive penal liability, it must be strictly construed as it seeks to punish members of an unlawful assembly for the offence or offences committed by their associate or associates in carrying out the common object of the assembly......" [underlining added]
11.1. The same principles were reiterated in paras (26) and (27) in Daya Kishan v. State of Haryana [JT 2010 (4) SC 325] and also in Kuldip Yadav and Ors. v. State of Bihar [JT 2011 (4) SC 436].
12. Whether the members of the unlawful assembly really had the common object to cause the murder of the deceased has to be decided in the facts and circumstances of each case, nature of weapons used by such members, the manner and sequence of attack made by those members on the deceased and the circumstances under which the occurrence took place. It is an inference to be deduced from the facts and circumstances of each case (vide Lalji and Ors. v. State of U.P. [JT 1989 (1) SC 109]; Ranbir Yadav v. State of Bihar [JT 1995 (3) SC 228]; Rachamreddy Chenna Reddy and Ors. v. State of A.P. [JT 1999 (1) SC 412]).
13. PW-1-Suresh and deceased Kennedy are the sons of PW-2 Anthony Muduthagam. There is a family dispute between PW-2's family and Jesu Adimai (A1) in respect of laying the fishing net in the sea. On 12.01.1994, at about 03.00 p.m., PW-2-Anthony Muduthagam, deceased Kennedy and injured person Raja went to attend the funeral of PW-2's cousin Jesu. While they were talking to one another, on the exhortation of Joseph (A11), the accused party attacked the complainant party. The occurrence started on the eastern side of the church and in front of the house of Sahayam (A3).
14. There are only about 350 houses in Perumanal village and most of them are fishermen. In the village, there were two factions who assembled to attend the funeral of Jesu. There was no common object among the accused as only Joseph (A11) had enmity with PW-2's family. Jesu Adimai (A1), Selvaraj (A2) and Sahayam (A3) were armed with bombs; Selvam (A4) and Antony Innasi (A5) were armed with sickles; and A6 to A10 were armed with sticks. On the exhortation of Joseph (A11), Jesu Adimai (A1) hurled the bomb which hit the forehead of deceased Kennedy and he fell down. Selvam (A2) threw the country bomb which hit the right ankle of Raja causing injuries to him. The bomb hurled by Sahayam (A3) fell on the ground and exploded. The deceased died of head injuries, fracture of frontal neck and both eyes found missing. PW-6-Dr. Kutralingam opined that the injuries on the deceased could have been caused by hurling of bombs. The fact that accused Nos. 1 to 3 carrying the bombs, gives indication that they had the common intention to cause the death of the complainant party. Selvam (A4) attacked PW-1-Suresh with aruval on the left shoulder and Antony Innasi (A5) attacked PW-2-Anthony Muduthagam on the left shoulder and accused Nos. 6 to 10 attacked the complainant party with sticks. There is no evidence to prove that the accused Nos. 1 to 11 had any common object to commit the murder of Kennedy which activated all of them to join in furtherance of the common object.
15. As noted earlier, first part of Section 149 IPC states about the commission of an offence in prosecution of the common object of the assembly whereas the second part takes within its fold knowledge of likelihood of the commission of that offence in prosecution of the common object. In the facts and circums-tances of the case, we are of the view that the prosecution has not proved the existence of the common object amongst the accused and that all of them acted in furtherance of the common object to invoke the first part of Section 149 IPC.
16. Let us consider whether the act of the accused falls under the second part of Section 149 IPC. As members of the unlawful assembly, whether the accused knew that the offence of murder is likely to be committed. It is a matter of evidence that Sahayam's house is situated next to the house of Jesu, for whose funeral, the two factions have assembled. Accused Nos. 4 to 10 may not have had the knowledge that Jesu Adimai (A1), Selvaraj (A2) and Sahayam (A3) were armed with bombs and that the murder of Kennedy was likely to be committed. On the exhortation of Joseph (A11), the accused seem to have individually reacted. There is no definite finding of the High Court that the common object of the assembly was to commit the murder or that the accused persons had knowledge that the offence of murder was likely to be committed and hence, the conviction of the accused Nos. 4 to 10 under Section 302 IPC with the aid of Section 149 IPC cannot be sustained.
17. It is now well established that this Court does not, by special leave convert itself into an appellate court to appreciate evidence for third time. As has been consistently held by this Court in Ramaniklal Gokaldas and Others v. State of Gujarat [1976 (1) SCC 6] and Ramanbhai Naranbhai Patel and others v. State of Gujarat [JT 1999 (9) SC 319] and other cases, unless some serious infirmity or perversity is shown, this Court normally refrains from reappreciating the matter on appeal by special leave. In the case at hand, hurling of bombs is attributed only to accused Nos. 1 to 3. Had the other accused intended to kill Kennedy and the witnesses, they would have inflicted injuries on the vital organs or used the surest weapon of committing murder and not mere sickles/sticks. Conviction of accused Nos. 4 to 10 under Section 302 IPC with the aid of Section 149 IPC, in our view, suffers from serious infirmity and liable to be set aside.
18. Insofar as the conviction of the Sahayam (A3), an attempt was made that he cannot be convicted under Section 302 IPC as Selvaraj (A2) and Sahayam (A3) were acquitted under Section 27(2) and Section 27(3) of the Arms Act, 1959. As rightly contended by the learned counsel for the State, the sole reason for acquittal under Section 27(2) and Section 27(3) of the Arms Act is non-obtaining of prior sanction from District Magistrate to prosecute the accused under the Arms Act. Hence, the acquittal of the accused Nos. 2 and 3 under Section 27(2) and Section 27(3) of the Arms Act is of no avail to accused No. 3.
19. Joseph A11: On behalf of Joseph (A11), it was submitted that there is nothing on record to show the involvement of Joseph in the occurrence and no overt act is attributed to him and hence, no liability could be fastened upon him. PWs 1 to 3 have consistently stated that Joseph (A11) asked them to "...hack and hurl bomb...". The words uttered by accused Joseph is the starting point for all the troubles and all the accused acted only on such instigation of accused Joseph (A11). In his evidence, Johnson (PW3) had stated "that there had been dispute between the families of Jesu Adimai (A1) and Joseph (A11) and the family of Anthony Muduthagam (PW2) with regard to fishing at sea". Though no overt act is attributed to the accused Joseph, the words uttered by him "...hack, throw bomb and kill..." clearly shows that only on the exhortation of the accused Joseph, other accused acted and attacked the complainant party. Joseph (A11) was convicted under Section 302 IPC read with Section 149 IPC even though he was charged under Section 302 IPC read with Section 109 IPC (fourth charge). Though the conviction of the accused Joseph under Section 302 IPC read with Section 149 IPC cannot be sustained, the same is modified as conviction under Section 302 IPC read with Section 109 IPC.
20. As discussed above, on the exhortation of Joseph (A11), Jesu Adimai (A1) hurled the bomb which hit the forehead of deceased Kennedy. Selvam (A2) hurled the bomb which hit the right ankle of Raja. Bomb hurled by Sahayam (A3) fell on the floor and exploded. The bomb hurled by Selvaraj (A2) and Sahayam (A3), though, had not hit the deceased, the fact remains that they carried the bomb which clearly indicates that Sahayam (A3) was sharing the intention with Jesu Adimai (A1) and Selvaraj (A2) in committing the murder. Conviction of Sahayam (A3) under Section 302 IPC read with Section 149 IPC is modified as conviction under Section 302 IPC read with Section 34 IPC.
21. Conviction of accused Nos. 4 to 10 under Section 302 IPC with the aid of Section 149 IPC suffers from serious infirmity and the same cannot be sustained. Since the prosecution has not succeeded in establishing and proving that there was an unlawful assembly with a common object to commit the offence, conviction of the accused Nos. 3 to 5 (under Section 148 IPC) and accused Nos. 6 to 11 (under Section 147 IPC) are set aside.
22. Considering the individual acts of the appellants, Selvam (A4) and Antony Innasi (A5) attacked PW1 and PW2 on their left shoulders respectively with sickles, conviction of Antony Innasi (A5) is modified as conviction under Section 324 IPC and the sentence of rigorous imprisonment of one year is maintained. Conviction of Selvam (A4) under Section 324 is affirmed and the sentence of imprisonment of one year imposed upon him is affirmed. Considering the acts of accused Nos.6 to 10 that they attacked Raja and PW-2 with sticks, conviction of accused Nos.6 to 10 under Section 323 read with Section 149 is modified as conviction under Section 323 IPC maintaining their sentence of imprisonment of six months.
23. Conviction of Sahayam (A3) and Joseph (A11) under Section 302 IPC read with Section 149 IPC is modified as Section 302 IPC read with Section 34 IPC and under Section 302 IPC read with Section 109 IPC respectively and the sentence of life imprisonment awarded to each of them is confirmed. Criminal Appeal No.413 of 2012 preferred by Joseph (A11) is dismissed. Sahayam (A3) and Joseph (A11) are directed to surrender to serve their remaining sentence.
24. Conviction of accused Nos. 4 to 10 [Selvam (A4), Antony Innasi (A5), Charles (A6), Jerone (A7), Edwinson (A8), Raj (A9) and Elizabethan (A10)] under Section 302 IPC read with Section 149 IPC is set aside and they are acquitted of the same. So far as conviction of Accused Nos. 4 to 10 for other offences and the sentence imposed upon each of them, the same is modified as indicated above and accordingly, appeals are partly allowed. Accused Nos. 4 to 10 have already undergone the sentence for more than six years, they need not surrender. Their bail bonds stand discharged.
**********
CROSS CITATION
1963 SCR (3) 331

CRIMINAL APPElLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No. 76 of 1962. Appeal from the judgment and order dated December 22, 1961, of the Patna High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 118 of1961 and death Reference No. 2 of 1961.

M. S. K. Sastri for the appellant,

D. P. Singh and D. Gupta, for the respondent. 1962. May 4. The judgment of the Court was delivered by GAJENDRAGADKAR, J.-The appellant Mahabir Gope alongwith eleven other persons was charged before the First Additional Sessions Judge, Bhagalpur with having committed offences under ss.147 333 and 302 readwith a. 34 of the Indian Penal Code. The prosecution case was that on or about the 12th day of June, 1959, the appellant and the other accused persons formed themselves into an unlawful assembly at Bhagalpur Special Central Jail and in prosecution of the common object of the said assembly, Rambilash Singh, the ChiefHead Warder Mohammed Ilyas and Panchand Panjiare, the night Watchmen, were assaulted. That is how an offence under s.147 was committed by the members of the said unlawful assembly. The prosecution case further was that on or about thesaid date and at the same place, in prosecution of the common object of the said assembly, the members of the assembly had committed an offence of rioting with deadly weapons while the Chief Head Warder and the two night Watchmenwere assaulted, and thereby all the members of the assembly rendered themselves liable to be punished under s. 148 of the Indian Penal Code.

The third charge- framed against the members of the unlawful assembly was that in furtherance of the' common object of the said assembly, Rambilash Singh was intentionally assaulted by some of the members of the assembly with a view to cause his death and that made all the members of the assembly liable under s.302/34 I.P.C.

Against the appellant, an additional charge was framed under s.303,I.P.C. Under this charge, the prosecution case was that since the appallent had committed an offence punishable unders.302/34 whilst he was undergoing sentence of imprisonment for life, he rendered himself liable to be punished only with death under s. 303.

The learned trial Judge has convicted the appellant of the offences charged and acting under s.303, has sentenced him to death. For the purpose 334 of this appeal, it is unnecessary to refer to the findings made by the learned trial Judge in regard to the prosecution case against the other members of the unlawful assembly. The appellantchallenged the correctness of the order of conviction and sentence thus passed against him by preferring anappealin the High Court atPatna. The sentence of death imposed on him was also referred to the High Court for confirmation. The High Court has confirmed the sentence of death and dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellant.It is against this order that the appellant has come to this Court by special leave; and the only point on which special leave has been granted is in regard to the scope and effect of the provisions of s.303 of the Indian Penal Code. That is how the narrow point which arises for our decision is whether the case of the appellant who has been convicted under s.302/34 in thepresent case falls under s. 303.

Mr. M.S.K. Sastri for the appellant contends that s. 303 can apply only to a case where an accused person who is already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for life commits murder and is convicted of it.He emphasises the factthat s.303 can be applied only where at the subsequent trial, the prisoner is found to have committed another murder. The expression "commits murder" used in s. 303 implies that the prisoner musthave himself committed the murder andthus becameliable to be convicted under s.302 without recourse to s.34; and since in the present case, the appellant has been convicted not because it is found that be himself committed themurder of Rambilash Singh, but he hasbeen found constructively guilty of murder and is convicted under s. 302/34 onthe ground that the said murder hadbeen committed in furtherance of the common intention of all the accused persons. 335 It istrue that the courts belowhave convicted the appellant under s.302/34 and it is in the light of thesaid conviction that the point raised by Mr. Sastri has to be considered.

For the purpose of s. 303, when can it be said that a person has committed a murder? Is it necessary that a personmust be proved to have himself committed the murder before s. 303 can be invoked against him, or would it be enough if it is shown that the person is constructively guilty of murder under s.302/34 ? The appellant's argument seeks to derive support from the fact that both ss. 299 and 300 refer to a specific act. Section 299, for instance, providesthat whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention or knowledge therein specified, commits the offence of culpable homicide. Inother words, it is the act done with the requisite intention or knowledge that constitutes the offence of culpable homicide. Similarly, s.300 provides that if the act by which the death is caused is donewith the intentionof causing death or with the intention or knowledge as specified in the three clausesof s.300, culpable homicide is murder. That again shows that it is the specified act which amounts to murder, and so, unless the act which amounts to murder has been committed by a personhimself, it cannot be said that he has committed murderunder s. 303. That, in substance, is the argument urged before us by the appellant.

In appreciating the validity of this argument, it is necessary to bear in mind the effect of the provisions of s. 34. Section 34 provides that when a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manneras if it were done by him alone. It is thus clear that as a result of the application of the principle 336 enunciated in s. 31, when the appellant was convicted under 302/34, in law it really meant that the appellant was liable for the act which caused the death of Rambilash Singh in the same manner as if it had been done by him alone, That if; the effect of the constructive liability which followsfrom the application of the principle laid down in s. 34. Section 34 embodies the ordinary commonsense principle that if two or more persons intentionally commit an offence jointly, in substance, it is just the same as if each one of them bad committed that offence. Common intention which is the basis of the principle laid down by s. 34 implies action-inconcert and that in its turn, postulates the existence of a prearranged plan. Therefore, if two or more persons acting in concert in pursuance of a pre-arranged plan proceed to commit an offence, s. 34 steps in and provides that for the act committed by one the other is liable in the same manner as if it had been done by him alone. That being the effect of the rule prescribed by s. 34, it is difficult to accept the argument that where a person has been convicted under s. 302/34, it cannot be said that he has committed the offence of murder. The act which caused the death of the victim may have been committed by another person, but since thesaid act had been done by the other person in furtherance of the common intention shared by that person and the appellant, in law, the act must be deemed to have been committed by the appellant alone. Therefore, where a person is convicted under s. 302/34, it must be held that he has committed the murderas much as the person by whose act the victim was killed.

The position would not be any different even if the appellant bad been convicted under s.302/149.Section 149 provides that if an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly 337 knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution ofthat object, every person who, at the time of the committing of that offence, is a member of the same assembly. is guilty of that offence. It is true that the basis ofconstructive liability imposed bys. 149 is mere membership of the unlawful assembly, whereas the basis of theconstructive liability contemplated by s. 34 is participation in the same actionwith the common intention of committing a crime. '.that, however, does not make any difference in the legal position that if a murder is committed by one member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly, all members of the unlawful assembly who at the time of the commission of that offence were members of such assembly would be guilty of the offence of murder. In such a case,again, where apersonis convicted under s.302/149, the true legal position is that, in law, hemust be deemed to have committed the murder as much as the actual murderer has.Therefore, in our opinion, s. 303 cannot be confined only to cases where a person undergoing sentence of imprisonment for life actually and in fact himself commits an act which results in the death of the victim. Thesaid section would apply oven in oases where a person undergoing sentence of imprisonment for life is convicted either under a. 302 read with s. 34 or under s. 302 read with a.149. That being our view, we must held that the courts below were right in sentencing the appellant to death under s. 303. The result is, the appeal fails and is dismissed.

Appeal dismissed, 338
**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAW
Indian Penal Code
Sections 32, 364, 363 - Held prosecution has failed to prove by evidence, motive or recovery and evidence led about last seen together is not consistent with guilt of appellants re offence of murder - Evidence is conclusive only about kidnapping of deceased but not for murder - As prosecution failed to prove, offence of murder conviction under Section 302 is set aside - Further kidï¿½napping is not with intention to commit murder - So conviction under Section 364 set aside but convicted them of offence of kidnapping under Section 363 IPC and sentenced to under go rigorous imprisonment for five years.
HELD
The evidence led by the prosecution about "last seen together" cannot be said to be consistent only with the hypotheï¿½sis of the guilt of the appellants as regards the offence of murder and incapable of being explained on any other hypothesis. In our opinion the evidence led by the prosecution is of a conï¿½clusive nature so far as kidnapping of the deceased is concerned but is inconclusive so far as the offence of murder is concerned. The chain of evidence is not so complete as to leave no doubt about the conclusion that the appellants also committed the murder of Avadhesh. May be, they did but that is not enough. The prosecution is obliged to establish that in all human probability the accused alone had committed the murder. This the prosecution has failed to prove in this case. The conviction of the appellï¿½ants for the offence under Section 302 IPC, therefore, cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside. So far as the conviction of the appellants for offence under Section 364 IPC is concerned, that too cannot be sustained because the kidnapping of the deï¿½ceased by the appellants cannot said to be with the intention to commit his murder. However, since we have accepted the evidence of PW.1, PW.5 and PW.7 and partly the statement of PW.9 and PW. 10, the prosecution can be said to have successfully established beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellants committed an ofï¿½fence under Section 363 IPC.[Para 10]


ORDER


1.These appeals are directed against the judgment of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh dated 8th April, 1994 dismissing the appeals filed by the appellants against their conviction and sentence as recorded by the learned Session Judge on 18th Januï¿½ary, 1991. The appellants were convicted of offences under secï¿½tions 364 and 302 IPC and were sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/- and in default two months simple imprisonment on the first count and to life imprisï¿½onment and a fine of Rs. 1,000/- and in default three months simple imprisonment on the second count.

2.The prosecution case in brief is that on 2nd September, 1987 at about 9.15 p.m., Ramgovind Sharma, PW. 9 lodged a report at P.S. Jhansi Road regarding the missing of his son Avadhesh Sharma who had gone to the school but had not returned. He gave the descripï¿½tion and identification of his son in the report. After registraï¿½tion of the missing person report, Ext. P-3, an intimation was sent to the Control Room. During the investigation statements of various prosecution witnesses including Ram Bharose Bajpayee, PW. 1 and Rati Ram, PW. 7 were recorded. According to their stateï¿½ments, they had seen Avadhesh along with the appellants near Ravi Shankar Hostel, Medical Tiraha. On the basis of this information, a search was made for the appellants. They were not found at their houses. A case under Section 364/34 IPC was registered on 3rd September, 1987 at 1 O' clock at night. A search was started and ultimately the dead body of Avadhesh was found between the bushes and trees in the Chattri. A panchnama of the dead body was prepared and the dead body was sent for post-mortem examination. Dr. V.K. Deewan, P.W., conducted the post-mortem examination and found a number of injuries on his person. According to his opinï¿½ion death of the deceased had occurred on account of strangulaï¿½tion and the injuries on his chest, which had led to failure of respiratory system. The appellants came to be arrested during the investigation on 6th September, 1987. Gauri Shankar, appellant, is alleged to have made a disclosure statement which is admissiï¿½ble under Section 27 of the Evidence Act leading to the recovery of a watch which, according to the prosecution, was on the person of the deceased when he left for school in the morning of 2nd September, 1987. Mohan, appellant, allegedly made a statement admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act leading to the recovery of a pen while Veerandra, appellant, allegedly made a statement admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act leading to the recovery of a dot pen. No recovery was effected from Ashok, appellant.

3.The recovered articles were sent to the police station for identification and Shri B.K. Agrawal, Naib Tehsildar, PW. 11, conducted an identification parade in the Tehsil Office of Gwaï¿½lior on 18th September, 1987. Ramgovind Sharma, PW. 9 and his wife Saroj, PW. 10 identified the seized articles as the ones which the deceased was carrying with him on the day of the occurï¿½rence. After completion of the investigation the appellants were sent up for trial and convicted and sentenced as already noticed.

4.There is no eye witness in the case. Both the trial court and the High Court have relied upon the following circumstances to connect the appellants with the crime :-

"(i) motive;

(ii) the deceased having been last seen in the company of the accused;

(iii) recoveries of articles belonging to the deceased;

(iv) factum of absconding on the part of the deceased."

5.Both the courts found all the circumstances to have been estabï¿½lished from the evidence on the record and hold that the circumï¿½stances conclusively established that the appellants were guilty of the offences with which they had been charged.

6.We have heard learned counsel for the parties and examined the record.

MOTIVE

7.According to the prosecution case the motive for murder of Avadhesh is stated to be that the brother of Ashok Kumar, appellï¿½ant, was involved in a hurt case by Khemraj Varun and Ramgovind Sharma, PW.9 was a witness in that case. It is alleged that on 1st September, 1987 i.e. a day before the occurrence, the appellï¿½ants warned PW.9 that he should not appear as a witness in Khemï¿½raj Varun's case, but since PW.9 declined to oblige the appellï¿½ants, they kidnapped Avadhesh and committed his murder. This motive to our minds is much too feeble. The prosecution had not led any evidence to show as to how the other appellants were connected with Ashok appellant. In the report Ext. P-3, there is no mention of the alleged motive. It is not even mentioned in the FIR. At the trial also, PW.10 Saroj, mother of the deceased, improved upon her earlier version to support the statement of PW. 9 in this behalf. There is no other evidence on the record to prove the existence of motive. This circumstance, has in our opinion, not been proved and even otherwise, it does not appear that there was any sufficient motive for the appellants to commit the murder of the only son of PW. 9, only because PW. 9 had to appear as a witness against the brother of Ashok, appellant.

RECOVERIES

8.The prosecution has relied upon the recovery of watch, Ext. P-8, Pen, Ext. P-9, and a dot pen Ext. P-12 allegedly on the disï¿½closure statements made by Gauri Shankar, Mohan and Veerandra, which are admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. The only witness for the recovery examined at the trial, apart from Mahender Partap Singh, PW. 12, the Investigating Officer, is Parmal Singh, PW. 6 who does not belong to the locality and who could give no satisfactory explanation for his presence at the relevant time at the police station, where the disclosure stateï¿½ments were allegedly made. The prosecution has attempted to connect the pen, Ext. P - 9 and the dot pen, Ext. P-12, which are of a common make, with the deceased on the strength of the inï¿½scription of his name on the same. The investigating officer admitted in his cross-examination that the price of the pen and the dot pen was about Rs. 1/- or Rs. 2/- in the market and the same were easily available. Parmal Singh PW. 6, did not depose at the trial that when the pers were recovered allegedly on the pointing out of th appellants Mohan and Veerendra, they contained the name of Avadhesh inscribed on them . That the pen and the dot pen contained the inscription of the name of Avadhesh is a later improvement, introduced at the trial. This renders the story of recovery of the pen and dot pen doubtful. So far as the recovery of the watch is concerned, there is no mention about the watch in the FIR. Watch P. 8 is a ladies writ watch. At the trial PW. 9 tried to explain that the said watch had been purchased by him for his wife Saroj, PW. 10 and the deceased was wearing that watch on his writs when he went to school. It appears to be also an after thought because if that was so there was no reason for PW. 9 not to have disclosed in the FIR that the deceased was wearing the watch. It appears to us that the recoveries are not free from doubt and the same appear to have been pressed into aid to buttress the prosecution's case. The evidence of Parmal Singh, PW. 6, when considered in the established facts and circumstances of the case, creates a doubt about his creditworthiness and consequently about the genuineness of the recoveries. We are, therefore, unable to place any reliance on the recoveries and hold that the recoveries do not connect the appellants with the crime.

ABSCONDING

9.So far as the evidence of absconding is concerned this again is wholly discrepant and fragile. According to the prosecution case, the occurrence took place on 2nd September, 1987. The appellants were arrested, according to the prosecution, on 6th September, 1987, although the defence has led evidence to show that on 3rd September, 1987, one of the appellants was already in custody of the police. Be that as it may, the arrest of the appellants on 6th September, 1987 when the case was registered under section 364/34 IPC only during the night intervening 3rd/4th September, 1987, cannot be considered to be such a circumstance which conï¿½nects the appellants with the murder of the deceased and is consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the appellï¿½ants. This circumstance also, therefore, has to be ruled out of consideration to connect the appellants with the offence of murder.

LAST SEEN TOGETHER

10.Ram Bharose Vajpayee, PW.1, deposed that he saw the appellants alongwith the deceased on cycle near Katora Tal. Rati Ram PW. 7, also deposed to having seen the deceased with the appellants near Katora Tal. Both the courts have relied upon the statements of P.W.1 and PW.7 in that behalf after giving cogent reasons. So far as PW.5 is concerned, he did not depose that he had seen the deceased with the appellant but, according to him, he had seen the appellants outside the Chhatri on the fateful day. The eviï¿½dence of PW.1, PW.5 and PW.7 has been rightly relied upon by the courts below but the same can only go to show that the appellants had kidnapped the deceased on the fateful day and nothing more than that. The evidence of these witnesses even if accepted in their totality does not go to connect the appellants with the crime of murder. Indeed Avdhesh Kumar's death was homicidal in nature but unless the prosecution can establish beyond a reasonï¿½able doubt that the appellants and the appellants alone had committed the murder, their conviction for an offence under section 302 IPC cannot be sustained. The evidence led by the prosecution about "last seen together" cannot be said to be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the appellï¿½ants as regards the offence of murder and incapable of being explained on any other hypothesis. In our opinion the evidence led by the prosecution is of a conclusive nature so far as kidï¿½napping of the deceased is concerned but is inconclusive so far as the offence of murder is concerned. The chain of evidence is not so complete as to leave no doubt about the conclusion that the appellants also committed the murder of Avadhesh. May be, they did but that is not enough. The prosecution is obliged to establish that in all human probability the accused alone had committed the murder. This the prosecution has failed to prove in this case. The conviction of the appellants for the offence under section 302 IPC, therefore, cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside. So far as the conviction of the appellants for offence under section 364 IPC is concerned, that too cannot be sustained because the kidnapping of the deceased by the appellants cannot said to be with the intention to commit his murder. However, since we have accepted the evidence of PW.1, PW. 5 and PW. 7 and partly the statement of PW. 9 and PW. 10, the prosecution can be said to have successfully established beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellants committed an offence under section 363 IPC.

11.We accordingly, while setting aside the conviction and senï¿½tence of the appellants for the offence under sections 312 and 364 IPC, convict them of the offence under section 363 IPC and sentence them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years. In case the appellants have undergone the sentence as imposed by us, they shall be released from custody forthwith if not required in any other case.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAW
Evidence in poison murder cases - Murder by poisoning is run like any other murder. Burden of proof in poison-murder" cases - Whether the prosecution must prove that the accused had the poison in his possession? - Whether failure to establish that factor should entail the acquittal of the accused? - Murder by poison is invariably committed under the cover and cloak of secrecy - It would be impossible for the prosecution to prove possession of poison with the accused - The insistence on proof of possession of poison with the accused invariably in every case is niether desirable nor practicable - It would mean to introduce an extraneous ingredient to the offence of murder by poisoning - In cases where dependence is wholly on circumstantial evidence, and direct evidence not being available, the Court can legitimately draw from the circumstances an inference on any matter one way or the other. 

CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973:
Section 293 - Report of chemical examiner - Murder by poisoning - Value to be attached to the report of the chemical examiner - The report by itself is not crucial - It is a piece of evidence - The report should normally be forwarded to the Doctor who conducted the autopsy - Held that the report of the chemical examiner coupled with the opinion of the doctor is sufficient to hold that it was a death by poisoning.

Appeal dismissed.

CASES REFERRED
1. Chandra Kant Myalchand Seth"s., Criminal Appeal No. 120 of 1957 decided on 19.2.1958.(SC)

2. Mt. Gajrani and Anr. v. Emperor, [A.I.R. 1933 Allahabad 394]

3. State v. Fateh Bahadur and Ors., [A.I.R. 1958, Allahabad]

4. Dharambir singh v. The State of Punjab [Criminal Appeal No. 98 of 1958 decided on 4.11.1958 (SC)] 

5. Anant Chantman Lagu v. The State of Bombay, [A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 500]

6. Mohan v. State of Uttar Pradesh., [A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 669]

7. Ram Gopal v. State of Maharashtra., [A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 656]

8. Sharda B.Chand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra., [1985 (1) SCR 88 = A.I.R. 1984 S.C. 1622]

JAGANNATHA SHETTY, J.

1.  One may ask the question whether murder by poisoning is  not run  like  any  other  murder ?  The  learned  counsel  for  the appellant  purports to state that it is not. He relies  upon  the judicial  prescriptions  as to the burden of  proof  in  "poison-murder" cases. He contends that the prosecution must prove  "that the  accused had the poison in his possession." He  asserts  that failure  to establish that factor should entail the acquittal  of the  accused. This is a vital question which goes far beyond  the case and it, therefore, requires careful consideration.

2.  Bhupinder Singh - Appellant was prosecuted for the murder of his wife by poisoning. He was sentenced for life imprisonment  by the Additional Sessions Judge, Faridkot in Session case No. 86 of 1983.  His  conviction  and sentence have been  affirmed  by  the Punjab  and  Haryana High Court in criminal appeal No.  82-DB  of 1984. He has  preferred this appeal by special leave  challenging the conviction and sentence.

3.  We may first advert to the prosecution case. It  reveals  a sad story. It runs like this: Gian Kaur, the victim in this  case is  the  only daughter of Baltej Singh. Baltej  Singh  like  many other  parents thought that his problems would be solved  by  the marriage  of his daughter. He got her married to Bhupinder  Singh by spending all his saving . His relatives also  contributed  for the  marriage. But ill-luck would have it, his  problems  started immediately  after the marriage. Bhupinder Singh and his  parents wanted  Gian Kaur to bring Rs. 10,000/- from her father.  It  was nothing but a demand for dowry. They stepped up their demand with harassment  to  Gian  Kaur. Gian Kaur informed  her  father.  The father  could  not arrange that much of amount.  He  had  already spent  all  that he had in connection with her marriage.  He  had also then given presents in cash and kind  to Bhupinder Singh. So he felt helpless. Unmerciful, Bhupinder Singh asked his wife  to go  back to her parents house. So she left to seek  shelter  with her  parents. She remained with them for about eight months.  But how long the father could keep his married daughter away from her husband.  Some parents think that it is a reflection  upon  them. Baltej  Singh  also  must  have thought  like  that.  He  somehow arranged  Rs. 6,000/- and sent Gian Kaur to her husband's  house. Gian  Kaur  rejoined her husband upon making the payment  of  Rs. 6,000/-. That appears to have satisfied Bhupinder Singh for about one year. In the meantime, Gian Kaur had a male child.  Naturally there was jubilation for Baltej Singh. He performed the customary Chuchhak  ceremony  and  again gave  Rs.  4,000/-and  buffalo  as presents  to Bhupinder singh. Bhupinder Singh ought to have  been happy  and  satisfied.  But he was not. It  was  alleged  by  the prosecution that this time he demanded a motorcycle. Baltej Singh could not give it. Gian Kaur, as usual, was again the target.  It was  further  alleged  by the prosecution  that  Bhupinder  Singh threatened  to kill his wife if motorcycle was not given to  him. Gian Kaur had kept her father informed about the said demand  and the threat.

4.  On  July  13,  1983,  Gian  Kaur  died  under  mysterious circumstances. Upon receiving that information, Baltej Singh with his brother Baldev Singh reached the place in the evening of that day,. They saw Gian Kaur, lying dead on a charpai. They suspected foul  play.  Baltej  Singh gave the  information  to  the  police narrating  all the above events. He informed the police that  his daughter  was  killed  by  Bhupinder Singh  and  his  parents  by administering something to her. On the basis of that information, the  F.I.R. was  issued. The investigation of the case was  taken by  A.S.I.  (PW 4). The body of Gian Kaur was sent  to  Dr.  Sant Prakash  Singh (PW 6)for post-morterm. The doctor  Prakash  Singh noticed  five  minor injuries on the body of  the  deceased.  The brain  and other vital organs were also found  to  be  congested. The  Doctor sent stomach contents, portions of  small  intestine, liver, spleen and kidney to the chemical examiner for the purpose of analysis.

5.  The chemical examiner in his report dated September 14, 1983 has  stated that an Organo phosphorus compound was found  in  the substance  sent  to him for analysis. The  investigating  officer sent  that report for opinion of the Doctor Prakash Singh  as  to the cause of death of Gian Kaur. The Doctor gave his opinion that the  death  of Gian Kaur was due to  organo  phosphorus  compound poisoning.

6.  Bhupinder  Singh,  his father Sher  Singh  and  his  mother Mukhtiar  Kaur were tried for committing the murder of Gian  Kaur by administering poison.

7.  The prosecution examined six witnesses and the  accused  in turn examined one. The trial court after considering the evidence and other material on record held as follows:

The  accused  had  strong  motive to  get  rid  of  Gian  Kaur.  Apparently motive for the murder was the inability of Gian Kaur  to satisfy the demand for dowry. The death of Gian Kaur was not  accidental  or suicidal. There was no reason for her to  commit  suicide.  It was also not a death by food poisoning  since  the  accused  and deceased shared common food on the fateful  night.  There was none else in the house on that night except Gian Kaur  and  the accused. The accused had an opportunity to  accomplish  their design. The accused must have administered the poison  to  the  victim.  The injuries found on the body  of  the  deceased  indicated the resistance she must have offered when the  poison  was administered to her. With these and other conclusions,  the  trial court finally said:

"In the background of the circumstances and evidence  discussed  above, the only conclusion possible is that Bhupinder Singh and  Mukhtiar Kaur did administer poison organo phosphorus  compound  to  gian  Kaur and did cause her death with  common  intention,  which  was  to  get  rid of her as she had  not  been  able  to  persuade  his father to meet their demand for motorcycle so  as  to  clear  way for another marriage of Bhupinder Singh  in  his  youthful years in order to get more and more of dowry." 

8.  Accordingly, the trial court found all the  three  accused guilty  of  the offence under Section 302 read  with  Section  34 I.P.C. They were sentenced to imprisonment for life.

9.  Challenging the legality of the conviction and sentence  the accused appealed to the High Court. It was urged before the  High Court  that  the death of Gian Kaur was not homicidal.  She  must have in all probability committed suicide since she was suffering from  tuberculosis.  It was also urged that the  prosecution  has failed to establish by evidence the necessary conditions for  the proof of murder by poisoning. The High Court did not  agree  with those  contentions.  The  High  Court ruled  out  the  theory  of suicide. It was observed that there was no evidence to show  that Gian  Kaur  was suffering from tuberculosis or ever  treated  for that disease. The High Court observed:

"Case  of murder by poisoning is always one  of  secrecy.  Almost  in every such case one has to depend on  circumstances.  Doubtless, before a person can be convicted on the strength  of  circumstantial evidence, the circumstances in question must  be  satisfactorily  established and the proved circumstances  must  bring home  the offence to the accused beyond reasonable doubt.  If those circumstances or some of them can be explained by  any  reasonably hypothesis then the accused must have the benefit of  that  hypothesis.  But  in  assessing  the  evidence  imaginary  possibility  has  no  place.  What has  to  be  considered  are  ordinary human probabilities. We have already referred to  some  important  circumstances which in our opinion point out to  the  guilt  of  Bhupinder Singh and Sher Singh  appellants.  In  the  well-known  case  of  ANANT  CHANTMAN  LAGU  V.  THE  STATE  OF  BOMBAY[A.I.R.  1960  S.C. 500] their Lordships held that  in  a  cause  of poisoning, the prosecution must establish:  (a)  that  the death took place by poisoning; (b) that the accused had the  poison  in  his  possession; and (c) that the  accused  had  an  opportunity  to administer the poison to the deceased. All  the  three  requirements  are satisfied in this case.  There  is  no  dispute that the death of the deceased was caused by poisoning.  It has been established by the chemical examiner's report, that  the  viscera contained organo phosphorus compound  poison.  The  evidence of the prosecution witnesses has established that  the  aforesaid  two  appellants had the  opportunity  to  administer  poison  to the deceased and that they had the motive to  commit  the  crime. Their running away from the house at the time  when  the  Investigating  Officer  visited  their  house  is  also  consistent with their guilt and not with their innocence."

10.  With  these  observations, the  High  Court  confirmed  the conviction  and sentence on Sher Singh and Bhupinder Singh  while acquitting Mukhtiar Kaur.

11.  The present appeal is only by Bhupinder Singh.

12.  Before  embarking on the validity of the  main  submission made in this appeal, we may first dispose of one other contention urged  for the appellant. Mr. R.N.Kohli, learned counsel for  the appellant  submitted  that  it is not  enough  for  the  chemical examiner merely to state in his report that the organo phosphorus compound  was  present  in  the  substance  sent  to  him  for examination.  He should have also stated that a lethal  dose  of the organo phosphorus compound was detected in the substance sent to him. His report should be full and complete to take the  place of evidence which he would have given if he were called to  Court as  witness.  In the absence of such particulars,  the  death  by poisoning  cannot  be inferred. In support  of  this  contention, learned  counsel relied upon two decision of the  Allahabad  High Court  viz.(i)MT.  GAJRANI  AND  ANR.  V.  EMPEROR  [A.I.R.  1933 Allahabad  394]  and (ii) STATE V. FATEH BAHADUR &  ORS.  [A.I.R. 1958,  Allahabad 1]. In the first case, it was observed  that  it was  not  enough for the chemical examiner merely  to  state  his opinion. He must also state the grounds which formed the basis of his  opinion.  The  second case was a case of  death  by  arsenic poisoning.  The chemical examiner did not state the  quantity  of arsenic  poison found in the viscera of the deceased. He did  not state whether it was a fatal dose or not. The High Court  pointed out  that  it would be of the utmost importance  before  a  Court could find any individual guilty of murder by arsenic poison that its  complete analysis should be made. It is not enough to  state that arsenic was detected in the body of the deceased.

13.  In  our opinion, these observations cannot be  taken  as  a rigid statement of law. No hard and fast rule can be laid down as regards  the value to be attached to the report of  the  chemical examiner. Section 293 of the Code of Criminal Procedure  provides that the report of scientific experts may be used as evidence  in any  inquiry,  trial  or other  proceedings  of  the  court.  The chemical examiner does not, as a rule, give an opinion as to  the cause  of  death  but  merely  gives  report  of  the  chemical examination of the substance sent to him. The report by itself is not crucial. It is a piece of evidence. The only protection to it is  that  it does not require any formal proof. It  is,  however, open to the Court if it thinks fit to call the chemical  examiner and  examine  him  as to the subject matter of  the  report.  The report  should normally be forwarded to the Doctor who  conducted the  autopsy. In the instant case, that was done. The Doctor  who conducted  the  autopsy  was given a copy of the  report  of  the chemical examiner. The Doctor in the light of the report gave his opinion that the death of Gian Kaur was by poisoning i.e.  organo phosphorus compound. The report of the chemical examiner  coupled with the opinion of the Doctor is, therefore, sufficient to  hold that it was a death by poisoning. 

14.  This  takes  us  to  the  main  contention  urged  for  the appellant. It was urged that in a case of murder by poison  there are three main points to be proved: firstly, did the deceased die of  the  poison in question, secondly, had the  accused  got  the poison in question in his or her possession; and thirdly, had the accused  an opportunity to administer the poison in  question  to the deceased. It was also urged that if the prosecution fails  to prove  these factors, then the accused cannot be  convicted.  The evidence  in the case, according to learned counsel  falls  short  of  these requirements and, in particular, as to the question  of proof of possession of the poison with the accused and  therefore the accused is entitled to acquittal.

15.  We  have been referred to some decisions of this  Court  in support of the contention urged. We have also examined some other cases  bearing  on the question raised. A brief survey  of  these cases would be useful to appreciate the contention urged for  the appellant.  There are two unreported decisions of this  Court  of the year 1958. The first one is in CHANDRA KANT MYALCHAND  SETH'S CASE  [Criminal  Appeal No. 120 of 1957  decided  on  19.2.1958]. There a woman died of alkali cyanide. The husband of the deceased was  tried and convicted by the trial court  for the  offence  of murder. The conviction was set aside by this Court. In the course of the judgment, it was observed:

"Before a person can be convicted of murder by poisoning, it is  necessary to prove that the death of the deceased was caused by  poison,  that the poison in question was in possession  of  the  accused and that poison was administered by the accused to  the  deceased."

16.  The acquittal, however, was based on the  consideration  of the entire facts and circumstances of the case. It was found that there  was  a greater motive to the deceased  to  commit  suicide that to the  accused to commit murder. This  court also took note of the concern and conduct of the accused when he found  his wife lying unconscious. The accused ran to the house of his friend and returned  with a Doctor to render assistance to the  victim.  The accused  called another Doctor for the same purpose. He was  also found  weeping  all the while. Taking into consideration  of  all these factors, this Court found no  justification to sustain  the conviction of the accused.

17.  DHARAMBIR SINGH V. THE STATE OF PUNJAB (Criminal Appeal  No. 98  of 1958 decided on 4.11.1958) is another  case  of  homicidal action  by  cyanide poisoning. It was perhaps in this  case,  the guidelines  as to the proof of certain facts  in  "poison  murder cases", were laid down by this  Court. It was observed:

"Where  the evidence is circumstantial the fact that  the  accused  had  motive  to cause death of  the  deceased,  though  relevant,  is not enough to dispense with the proof of  certain  facts  which are essential to be proved in such  cases,  namely  (firstly)  did  the  deceased  die of  poison  in  question  ?  (secondly)  had the accused the poison in his  possession?  and  (thirdly)  had  the accused an opportunity  to  administer  the  poison in question to the deceased ? It is only when the motive  is  there and these facts are all proved that the court may  be  able to draw the inference, that the poison was administered by  the accused to the deceased resulting in his death."

18.  After laying down these principles, the court considered the entire  evidence on record which indicated the likelihood of  the deceased  committing  suicide  or  another  person  to  have administered the poison to the  deceased. This Court  accordingly acquitted the accused by extending the benefit of doubt.

19.  If one prefers to go yet further back we find a decision  of the Allahabad High Court which is exactly on the principles  laid down  in Dharambir singh case. In MT. GAJRANI V. EMPEROR  [A.I.R. 1933 All. 394] Benett, J. speaking for the Court observed (at  p. 394.)

"In  a case of murder by poison there are three main points  to  be  proved:  firstly,  did the deceased die of  the  poison  in  question; secondly, had the accused got the poison in  question  in  his  or  her possession; and thirdly, had  the  accused  an  opportunity  to  administer  the  poison  in  question  to  the  deceased.  If these three points are proved, a presumption  may  under  certain  circumstances be drawn by the Court  that  the  accused did administer poison to the deceased and did cause the  death  of  the deceased. It is not usual that  reliable  direct  evidence  is available to prove that the accused  did  actually  administer poison to the deceased. The evidence of motive which  is frequently given in these cases is of subsidiary importance,  and  the mere fact that the accused had a motive to  cause  the  death  of the deceased is not a fact which will  dispense  with  the  proof of the second and third points that the accused  had  the  poison in his or her possession, and that the accused  had  an opportunity to administer the poison."

20.  The above proposition found its way into MOHAN V. STATE  OF UTTAR  PRADESH [A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 669] and RAM GOPAL V.  STATE  OF MAHARASHTRA [A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 656]. In Mohan's case, the death in question was by arsenic poisoning. In that case, the  prosecution was able to prove that the accused gave 'peras' to the victim  as 'pershad'  and  the  victim  died  after  eating  the  'pershad'. 'Pershad' contained arsenic. There was thus direct evidence as to the  possession  of  the poison with  the  accused.  This  Court, therefore,  had  no  difficulty to  sustain  the  conviction  and sentence awarded to the accused.

21.  Ram  Gopal's case was concerned with  homicidal  action  by administering  a  compound called "kerosene  and  organo  choloro compound".  The  High Court, relying upon the  motive  and  other circumstantial evidence convicted the accused for the offence  of murder  although  there was no evidence that the accused  was  in possession  of poison. This Court could not agree with  the  view taken by the High Court. The analysis of the evidence produced by the  prosecution  revealed that the motive  alleged  against  the accused  was  not  fully  established.  The  incriminating circumstantial evidence against the accused was also found to  be insufficient. So the conviction of the accused was set aside  and the acquittal was recorded.

22.  SHARDA B.CHAND SARDA V. STATE OF MAHARASHTRA [1985 (1)  SCR 88  =  A.I.R.  1984 S.C. 1622] is yet another case  of  death  by cyanide poisoning for which the husband of the deceased was tried for  murder. there was no direct evidence to establish  that  the accused  was  in  possession  of that  poison.  The  High  Court, however,  relied upon the circumstantial evidence  and  convicted the  accused. In the appeal preferred by the accused, this  Court did  not  agree  with the  reasoning of  the  High  Court.  After referring  to  Ram  Gopal's case, Fazal  Ali,  J.,  focussed  the attention  on  the  following four  factors:  The  learned  Judge observed (at p. 167).

"So  far as this  matter is concerned, in such cases the  court  must  carefully  scan  the evidence  and  determine  the  four  important circumstances which alone can justify a conviction:

(1) there  is a clear motive for an accused to administer  poison  to the deceased,

(2) that  the  deceased  died  of  poison  said  to  have  been  administered,

(3) that the  accused had the poison in his possession,
(4) that  he had an opportunity to administer the poison to  the  deceased.

The learned Judge went on to state:

"In  the instant case, while two ingredients have  been  proved  but  two  have not. In the first place, it has  no  doubt  been  proved  that Manju died of potassium cyanide and  secondly,  it  has  also  been  proved  that  there  was  an  opportunity  to  administer the poison. It has, however, not been proved by  any  evidence that the appellant had the  poison in his  possession.  On the other hand, as indicated above, there is clear  evidence  of  PW  2 that potassium cyanide could have been  available  to  Manju  from the plastic factory of her mother, but there is  no  evidence to show that the accused could have procured potassium  cyanide from any available source. We might here extract a most  unintelligible and extra-ordinary finding of the High Court:

"It is true that there is no direct evidence on these two points, because the prosecution is not able to lead evidence that the accused had secured potassium cyanide poison from a particular source. Similarly there is no direct evidence to prove that he had administered poison to Manju. However, it is not necessary to prove each and every fact by a direct evidence. Circumstantial evidence can be a basis for proving this fact."

The comment by the High Court appears to be frightfully vague and absolutely unintelligible. While holding in the clearest possible terms  that  there is no evidence in this case to show  that  the appellant  was in possession of poison, the High  Court  observes that  this  fact  may  prove  either  by  direct  or  indirect (circumstantial) evidence. But it fails to indicate the nature of the  circumstantial  or  indirect  evidence  to  show  that  the appellant  was  in possession of poison. If the  Court  seems  to suggest that merely because the appellant had the opportunity  to administer  poison  and  the same was found in the  body  of  the deceased,  it  should  be  presumed that  the  appellant  was  in possession  of poison, then it has committed a serious and  gross error of law and has  blatantly violated the principles laid down by  this Court. The High Court has not indicated as to  what  was the  basis  for  coming to finding that the  accused  could  have procured the cyanide. On the other hand, in view of the  decision in  Ram Gopal's case failure to prove possession of  the  cyanide poison with the accused by itself would result in failure of  the prosecution to prove its case."

23. This Court then went into the merits of the prosecution case. It was observed that the deceased was of sensitive mind. She  had  occasionally  suffered mental depression due to her inability  to adjust herself to her husband's family. It was also observed that the deceased had access to the poison in question. She could have secured  the poison from the factory of her  mother.  Considering these  and other circumstances, it was held "that it might  be  a case of suicide or murder and both were equally probable." So the accused was given the benefit of doubt and he was acquitted.

24.  From  the foregoing cases, it will be seen that  in  poison murder cases, the accused was not acquitted solely on the failure of  the  prosecution to establish one or  the  other  requirement which this Court has laid down in Dharambir Singh case. We do not also find any case where the accused was acquitted solely on  the ground that the prosecution has failed to prove that the  accused had  the  poison in his possession. The accused in all  the  said cases  came  to  be acquitted by taking  into  consideration  the totality  of  the circumstances  including  insufficient  motive, weakness  in the chain of circumstantial evidence and  likelihood of the deceased committing suicide.

25. We do consider that there should be acquittal on the  failure of  the  prosecution to prove the possession of poison  with  the accused. Murder by poison is invariably committed under the cover and  cloak of secrecy. Nobody will administer poison  another  in the  presence  of others. The person who  administers  poison  to another  in  secrecy  will  not keep a  portion  of  it  for  the investigating  office  to  come and collect it.  The  person  who commits  such murder would naturally take care to  eliminate  and destroy  the  evidence against him. In such cases,  it  would  be impossible for the prosecution to prove possession of poison with the  accused.  The  prosecution  may,  however,  establish  other circumstances consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. The court then would not be justified in  acquitting the  accused  on the ground that the prosecution  has  failed  to prove possession of the poison with the accused.

26.  The poison murder cases are not to be put outside the  rule of circumstantial evidence. There may be obvious very many  facts and  circumstances  out of which the Court may  be  justified  in drawing permissible inference that the accused was in  possession of  the  poison  in question. There may be very  many  facts  and circumstances proved against the accused which may call for tacit assumption  of  the  factum  of possession  of  poison  with  the accused. The insistence on proof of possession of poison with the accused  invariably  in  every  case  is  neither  desirable  nor practicable. It would mean to introduce an extraneous  ingredient to  the  offence of murder by poisoning.  We  cannot,  therefore, accept  the  contention  urged by the  learned  counsel  for  the appellant.  The accused in a case of murder by  poisoning  cannot have  a  better chance of being exempted from sanctions  than  in other kinds of murders. Murder by poisoning is run like any other murder.  IN  cases where dependence is wholly  on  circumstantial evidence, and direct evidence not being available, the Court  can legitimately  draw  from the circumstances an  inference  on  any matter one way or the other.

27.  The view that we have taken gets support from the  decision of  this Court in ANANTH CHINTAMAN LAGUY V. THE STATE  OF  BOMBAY (AIR  1960 SC 500) where Hidayatullah, J., has given  an  anxious consideration  to the three propositions laid down  in  Dharambir Singh case. The learned Judge did not consider them as invariable criteria  of proof to be established by the prosecution in  every case  of murder by poisoning. The learned Judge said (at p.  519-520):

"It is now necessary to consider the arguments which have  been  advanced  on behalf of the appellant. The first  contention  is  that  the  essential ingredients required to be proved  in  all  cases of murder by poisoning were not proved by the prosecution  in  this  case.  Reference  in this connection  is  made  to  a  decision of the Allahabad High Court in Mt. Gajrani v. Emperor,  AIR 1933 All 394 and to two unreported decisions of this  Court  in Chandrakant Nyalchand Seth v. The State of Bombay,  Criminal  Appeal  No.  120  of  1957 decided of  February  19,  1958  and  Dharambir Singh v. The State of Punjab, Criminal Appeal No,  98   of  1958,  decided  on 4.11.1958. In  these  cases,  the  Court  referred  to  three  propositions which  the  prosecution  must  establish in a case of poisoning; (a) that death took place  by  poisoning;  (b)  that  the  accused  had  the  poison  in  his  possession;  and  (c) that the accused had  an  opportunity  to  administer  the poison to the deceased. The case in Cr. A.  No.  98  of  1958  D/-  4.11.1958  (SC)  turned  upon  these  three  propositions.  There,  the  deceased had died as  a  result  of  poisoning by potassium cyanide, which poison was also found  in  the autopsy. The High Court had disbelieved the evidence  which  sought  to  establish that the accused had  obtained  potassium  cyanide,  but  held,  nevertheless  that  the  circumstantial  evidence  was sufficient to convict the accused in  that  case.  This Court, did not however, accept the circumstantial evidence  as  complete. It is to be observed that the three  propositions  were  laid  down  not as the invariable criteria  of  proof  by  direct  evidence  in  a case of murder  by  poisoning,  because  evidently if after poisoning the victim, the accused  destroyed  all  traces  of  the  body,  the  first  proposition  would  be  incapable  of being proved except by  circumstantial  evidence.  Similarly,  if the accused gave a victim something to  eat  and  the victim died immediately on the ingestion of that food  with  symptoms  of  poisoning and poison, in fact, was found  in  the  viscera,  the  requirement  of proving  that  the  accused  was  possessed  of  the poison would follow from  the  circumstances  that the accused gave the victim something to eat and need  not  be separately proved."

The leaned Judge continued:

"The  cases  of this Court which were  decided  proceeded  upon  their own facts, and though the three propositions must be kept  in  mind  always, the sufficiency of the  evidence,  direct  or  circumstantial, to establish murder by poisoning will depend on  the  facts of each case. It the evidence in a  particular  case  does  not  justify the inference that death is  the  result  of  poisoning  because of the failure of the prosecution  to  prove  the fact satisfactorily, either directly or  by  circumstantial  evidence,  then the benefit of the doubt will have to be  given  to  the accused person. But if circumstantial evidence, in  the  absence  of direct proof of the three elements, is so  decisive  that  the  Court can unhesitatingly hold that the death  was  a  result  of administration of poison (though not  detected)  and  that  the  poison must have been administered  by  the  accused  person, then the conviction can be rested on it."

28. So much for the principles for which the learned counsel  for the  appellant fought for. On the facts there is  concurrence  of opinion  between  the  two courts below. This  Court  seldom  re-examines the findings of fact reached by the High Court. We  may, however,  out  of deference to the counsel briefly refer  to  the evidence.  The  prosecution has established the  motive  for  the murder.  The  proof of motive goes a long way to tilt  the  scale against  the  accused which provides a foundational  material  to connect  the  chain  of circumstances. The facts  which  bear  on motive  are  distressing.  After  the  marriage,  Gian  Kaur  was subjected  to repeated harassment for not satisfying  the  demand for dowry made by Bhupinder Singh. Baltej Singh (PW2) has  stated that  Bhupinder Singh asked Gian Kaur to bring  Rs.  10,000/-.The parents  of  Bhupinder Singh were also parties  to  that  demand. Baltej Singh with all difficulties satisfied that demand in  part by  payment of Rs. 6,000/-. Bhupinder Singh  thereafter  demanded motorcycle.  When that was not immediately given Bhupinder  Singh held out a threat to his wife that she would be killed. This  was conveyed to Baltej Singh. Before he could take a decision in this regard he was shocked to receive the news of death of Gian  Kaur. This  has been proved by the testimony of Baltej Singh (PW2)  and Nazir Singh (PW3). The demand for dowry followed by harassment to the deceased has been thus satisfactorily proved.

29.  The evidence of the Doctor and the report of  the  chemical examiner  has  established beyond doubt that Gian  Kaur  died  of organo  phosphorus  compound poisoning. Bhupinder  Singh  had  an opportunity  to administer that poison. There was nobody else  in the  house. All the inmates had their common food in  the  night. All  of them slept in he same place. Both the Courts  have  ruled out  the theory of suicide by Gian Kaur. We entirely  agree  with that finding. She could not have thrown her child to the mercy of others  by committing suicide and indeed no mother would  venture to  do  that. The post-mortem report giving  the  description  of injuries  found on the body of the deceased would also  defy  all doubts  about  the theory of suicide. She had  contusion  on  the front  of right leg. Abrasion on the front of the left  leg  just below  the knee joint. Linear abrasion on the back of  the  right hand.  Linear abrasion on the antro-lateral aspect of left  fore-arm  in  its  middle. And contusion on the back  of  right  elbow joint.  These injuries, as the Courts below have  observed  could have  been  caused  while Gian Kaur  resisted  the  poison  being administered to her.

30.  The behaviour of Bhupinder Singh in the early hours of  that fateful  day by going to his field as if nothing had happened  to his  wife  is  apparently  inconsistent  with  the  normal  human behaviour.  There was no attempt made by him or other inmates  of the house to look out for any Doctor to give medical attention to the  victim.  The  movement and disposition  of  Bhupinder  Singh towards  the  victim  and situations are  incompatible  with  his innocence. On the contrary, it gives sustenance to his guilt.

31.  The  Courts  below having considered all  these  facts  and circumstances had no difficulty to convict the accused for murder and we see no good reason to interfere with that conclusion. 

32.  In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed.

**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAW
Indian Penal Code
Section 302, 300 -Thirdly whether offence was of murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder - Facts on record held to show that appellant inflicted injury by piercing sharp edged weapon into the heart of deceased and it cause death instantly - Held injury with intention to murder - Section 302 correctly applied - Conviction upheld.
HELD
As per the evidence of PW-15, the injury to the heart was caused with a sharp object and the injury was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature which would come under clause thirdly of Section 300 IPC. The question, therefore, is: whether the offence is one of murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder? Ms. K. Sharada Devi, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, contends that the appellant was not in know whether the deceased would be coming there as an informer to the police; the deceased had several enemies and that they were in search of him. As a consequence, it was not known that he would meet the deceased and in consequence, he had no intention to kill the deceased. We cannot appreciate the argument of the learned counsel. Notice is confined only to the nature of the offence committed by the appellant and, therefore, we have to proceed on the basis of the evidence on record as accepted by the courts below and then to consider whether the facts bring out the offence of murder punishable under section 302 I.P.C.

In the light of the aforestated facts and in view of the nature of injury inflicted upon the deceased, it is axiomatic that when the appellant had inflicted injury by piercing sharp edged weapon into the heart of the deceased as consequence of which the deceased died instantly, the necessary inference would be that he inflicted the injury with intention to do away with the deceased. In the light of the PW-15, doctor's evidence and material prosecution evidence spoken to by the witnesses and the words of "doing away with the deceased" as uttered before the commission of the crime, the offence is clearly one of the murder. Accordingly, we do not think that the High Court has committed any error in confirming the conviction of the appellant for the offence of murder under Section 302 I.P.C. and sentencing him to undergo imprisonment for life. [Para 4 & 5]


ORDER


1. Leave granted.

2. This appeal by special leave arises from the judgment and order dated 18.10.1995 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Criminal Appeal No.32/95.

3. The appellant-accused, according to the prosecution, is the uncle of accused No.2. They were residents of Velleturu Village of Krishna District of Andhra Pradesh. One V. Nageswara Rao alias Naguru, (hereinafter called the "deceased"), was a resident of Sattupalli in Khammam District. PW-9 is the widow of the deceased. PW-1 is the native of Veeramallu village in Khammam District. It is the prosecution case that all of them are 'Yerukala' by caste. The deceased and PW-6 used to commit thefts and they were ex-convicts. A-1 along with the deceased, also used to commit the offences. While the investigation in Crime No.110 of 1991, for an offence under section 395, was in progress, PW-16, the Sub-Inspector of Police had sent for PW-1 through the deceased and two constables. At about 11 a.m. on January 17, 1992, they reached Bhimavarppadu village and went into a Hotel at Junction. While P-Ws.6 and 10 stayed back, the deceased went to the house of PW-1. The deceased informed PW-1 that he was called by the Sub-Inspector of Police. PW-1 then told him that he could not walk because he was having pain in the legs. They proceeded towards the coffee hotel at the Junction. It is the prosecution case that when PW-1, the deceased and PW-3, who joined them on the way reached the Bhimvarappadu junction, the appellant and A-2 came on two cycles from behind and cought hold of the deceased. It is the further case of the prosecution that A-1 came near the deceased put a towel around the neck of the deceased and pulled him. It is also said to have been uttered by the appellant that the deceased should be done to death on that date. Thereafter, A-2 caught hold of the deceased after twisting his hands towards back. Thereupon, A-1, the appellant took out a knife from his waist and stabbed the deceased. According to the evidence of PW-15, the doctor, who conducted autopsy, the deceased had three injuries of which Injury No.3 is "an eliptical oblique injury of 2-1/2" X 1" penetrating through chest wall tapering towards lower and exposing cut muscles and cut ribs 2" medial to left nipple. Clotted blood present. Sharp edge weapon. Internal Injuries: On opening the skin over the chest wall 7th and 8th ribs completely cut and 6th rib partially found cut just lateral to left margin of sternum corresponding to external injury No.3. On opening the chest wall, an oblique injury of 1-1/2" through and through present over the right verticle. Pericardium is found torn. Extravasation of blood into surrounding tissues in respect of all the injuries mentioned noticed. All the injuries are ante-mortem."

4. As per the evidence of PW-15, the injury to the heart was caused with a sharp object and the injury was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature which would come under clause thirdly of Section 300 IPC. The question, therefore, is: whether the offence is one of murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder? Ms. K. Sharada Devi, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, contends that the appellant was not in know whether the deceased would be coming there as an informer to the police; the deceased had several enemies and that they were in search of him. As a consequence, it was not known that he would meet the deceased and in consequence, he had no intention to kill the deceased. We cannot appreciate the argument of the learned counsel. Notice is confined only to the nature of the offence committed by the appellant and, therefore, we have to proceed on the basis of the evidence on record as accepted by the courts below and then to consider whether the facts bring out the offence of murder punishable under section 302 I.P.C.

5. In the light of the aforestated facts and in view of the nature of injury inflicted upon the deceased, it is axiomatic that when the appellant had inflicted injury by piercing sharp edged weapon into the heart of the deceased as consequence of which the deceased died instantly, the necessary inference would be that he inflicted the injury with intention to do away with the deceased. In the light of the PW-15, doctor's evidence and material prosecution evidence spoken to by the witnesses and the words of "doing away with the deceased" as uttered before the commission of the crime, the offence is clearly one of the murder. Accordingly, we do not think that the High Court has committed any error in confirming the conviction of the appellant for the offence of murder under Section 302 I.P.C. and sentencing him to undergo imprisonment for life.

6. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

**********
HEADNOTE
MOTOAR VEHICLE 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 
Sections 163A, 167, 170 and 173 - Payment of compensation for death or injury suffered in motor vehicle accident - Liability of insurer - Rights of heirs of victim - Whether it is necessary to prove wrongful act or neglect or default - Deceased employed as driver of an autorickshaw owned by another person - Vehicle insured with respondent insurers - Rickshaw hired by unknown persons - Vehicle not traceable thereafter - Recovery of the body of the vehicle driver by police - For loss of the auto rickshaw owner get-ting compensation from insurers - Heirs of deceased autodriver filing claim petition for damages - Tribunal holding that the incident was an "accident" falling within the purview of MV Act and holding owner liable for compensation and in view of agreement between the owner and Insurance Company the statutory liability stood fastened on the insurers - High Court on appeal by insurers holding that there was no accident and that the death of the driver was caused by murder and hence claim petitions not main-tainable - Whether High Court correct in holding so. Held death of driver was accidental in the felonious act of theft of the auto. Such death could not be considered to be "murder". Sim-plicitor. Accident claims Tribunal therefore justified in award-ing com- pensation. Reversal of such decision 
by High Court not correct. Principles laid down in (1910) 1KB 689 and (1914) AC 667 applied.

Workmen"s Compensation Act, 1923 
"Death" - Meaning - Whether the definition under the Act could be applied to a claim for damages preferred under the Motor Vehicles Act. Held there being no difference in the objects of both enact-ments reliance upon the legal interpretations under the Compensa-tion Act in a claim under MV Act not misplaced more so when the claimants were entitled to proceed under either of the Acts.
HELD
"Murder", as it is understood, in the common parlance is a felo-nious act where death is caused with intent and the perpetrators of that act normally have a motive against the victim for such killing. But there are also instances where murder can be by accident on a given set of facts . The difference between a "murder" which is not an accident and a "murder" which is an accident, depends on the proximity of the cause of such murder. In our opinion, if the dominant intention of the Act of felony is to kill any particular person then such killing is not an acci-dental murder but is a murder simplicitor, while if the cause of murder or act of murder was originally not intended and the same was caused in furtherance of any other felonious act then such murder is an accidental murder.(Para 10)
The deceased, a driver of the auto rickshaw, was duty bound to have accepted the demand of fare paying passengers to transport them to the place of their destination. During the course of this duty, if the passengers had decided to commit an act of felony of stealing the auto rickshaw and in the course of achieving the said object of stealing the auto rickshaw, they had to eliminate the driver of the auto rickshaw then it cannot but be said that the death so caused to the driver of the auto rickshaw was an accidental murder. The stealing of the auto rickshaw was the object of the felony and the murder that was caused in the said process of stealing the auto rickshaw is only incidental to the act of stealing of the auto rickshaw. Therefore, it has to be said that on the facts and circumstances of this case the death of the deceased (Dasarath Singh) was caused accidentally in the process of committing the theft of the auto rickshaw.(Para 14)
We have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the murder of the deceased (Dasarath Singh) was due to an accident arising out of the use of motor vehicle. Therefore, the trial court rightly came to the conclusion that the claimants were entitled for compensation as claimed by them and the High Court was wrong in coming to the conclusion that the death of Dasarath Singh was not caused by an accident involving the use of motor vehicle.(Para 18)

We do not see how the object of the two Acts, namely, the Motor Vehicles Act and the Workmen"s Compensation Act are in any way different. In our opinion, the relevant object of both the Acts are to provide compensation to the victims of accidents. The only difference between the two enactments is that so far as the Workmen"s Compensation Act is concerned, it is confined to workmen as defined under that Act while the relief provided under Chapter X to XII of the Motor Vehicles Act is available to all the victims of accidents involving a motor vehicle. In this conclusion of ours we are supported by Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act as per which provision, it is open to the claimants either to proceed to claim compensation under the Workmen"s Compensation Act or under the Motor Vehicles Act. A perusal of the objects of the two enactments clearly establishes that both the enactments are beneficial enactments operating in the same field, hence judicially accepted interpretation of the word "death" in Workmen"s Compensation Act is, in our opinion, appli-cable to the interpretation of the word death in the Motor Vehi-cles Act also.
(Para 15)

CASES REFERRED
1. Shankarayya and Anr. v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and Anr. (JT 1998 (4) SC 300)
2. Shivaji Dayanu Patil and Anr. v. Vatschala Uttam More, (JT 1991 (3) SC 133)
Foreign Cases Referred
:
1. Board of Management of Trim Joint District School v. Kelly (1914 AC 667)
2. Nisbet v. Rayne and Burn ((1910) 1 KB 689)
3. Challis v. London and South Western Railway Company, (1905 2 King"s Bench 154)

SANTOSH HEGDE, J.
1. One Dasarath Singh was a driver of an auto rickshaw owned by Lalit Singh. The vehicle in question was registered as a public carrier vehicle used for hire by the passengers. This vehicle was insured with the respondent-Insurance Company. On 22nd of March, 1995, it is stated that some unknown passengers hired the above auto rickshaw from rickshaw stand at Dimapur between 5 to 6 p.m. It is also not in dispute that the said auto rickshaw was report-ed stolen and the dead body of driver Dasarath Singh was recov-ered by the police on the next day, the auto rickshaw was never recovered and the claim of the owner for the loss of auto rick-shaw was accepted by the respondent-Insurance Company and a sum of Rs. 47,220/- was settled by the said company towards the loss suffered by the owner.
2. One Darshan Singh claiming to be a Power of Attorney holder of the present appellants filed a claim petition along with the present appellants under Section 163 A of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short the "Act") claiming damages for the death caused to the deceased Dasarath Singh during the course of his employ-ment under Lalit Singh as a death caused in an accident arising out of the use of vehicle. The Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Nagaland as per its judgment dated 24th of June, 1996 came to the conclusion that the death of the driver of the auto rickshaw (Dasarath Singh) was caused by an accident coming within the purview of the Motor Vehicles Act, therefore, held that the owner of the vehicle was liable to compensate the death of the driver in money value. Since there was an agreement between the vehicle owner and the respondent-Insurance Company to compensate the employer of the vehicle, said legal and statutory liability stood fastened on the respondent-Insurance Company. The Tribunal also held that the quantum of claim of the claimants stood established and consequently it awarded a sum of Rs.2,81,500/- against the Insurance Company with interest @ 12% on the amount awarded from the date of application till payment.
3. The Insurance Company preferred an appeal by itself before the Gauhati High Court (Kohima Bench) in M.A. (F) No. 8 (K) 96. The High Court by its judgment dated 9.3.1998 came to the conclusion that there was no motor accident as contemplated under the Act. The High Court further held that the case in hand was a case of murder and not of an accident, hence a petition for claim under the provisions of the Act did not arise. The High Court, accord-ingly, allowed the appeal and set aside the judgment and the award made by the Tribunal.
4. Originally, the above mentioned Power of Attorney holder had preferred the above appeal making the wife and children of the deceased as proforma respondents along with the other respondent. By an Order of this Court dated 18th of February, 2000, this Court felt that to protect the interest of the heirs of the deceased the wife and children of the deceased should be first impleaded as appellants to this appeal and the cause-title be amended, which having been done and notice being issued, the respondent-Insurance Company is represented before us.
5. We have heard the parties. Leave granted.
6. On behalf of the appellants, Shri Anurabh Chowdhury contends that the deceased was employed to drive the auto rickshaw for ferrying passengers on hire and on the fateful day the auto rickshaw was parked at the rickshaw stand at Dimapur and at about 5 to 6 p.m. some unknown passengers had engaged the said auto rickshaw for their journey towards Singrijan area and thereafter nothing was known of the driver or rickshaw. It is only on the next day that the authorities were able to recover the body of the deceased and the auto rickshaw in question was never traced till date. The owner of the auto rickshaw has, therefore, been compensated by the Insurance Company for the loss of the said auto rickshaw, therefore, the murder of the deceased Dasarath Singh squarely comes within the word "death" due to accident arising out of the use of motor vehicle found in Section 163A (1) of the Act. Consequently the Tribunal was justified in awarding the compensation claimed by the appellants. He contended the word "accident" has not been defined under the Motor Vehicles Act and the said Act being a beneficial legislation, a liberal interpre-tation should be given so as to achieve the objects of the Act. He contended that the deceased being an employee was entitled for compensation both under the Motor Vehicles Act and also under the Workmen"s Compensation Act, 1923. However, under Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act, the heirs of the deceased had a choice either to claim compensation under that Act or under the Work-men"s Compensation Act. The appellants having chosen to invoke the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, the Tribunal was wholly justified in awarding the compensation, while the High Court, according to him, without properly appreciating the reasonings adopted by the Tribunal has interfered with the just order of the Tribunal. He also contends that the appeal filed by the Insurance Company was not maintainable for not having obtained the leave of the Tribunal as required under Section 170 of the Act. He relies on a judgment of this Court in the case of Shankarayya and Anr. v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and Anr. (JT 1998 (4) SC 300 = 1998 (3) SCC 140). Ms. Pankaj Bala Verma, appearing for the respondent-Insurance Company does not in fact dispute the maintainability of the petition filed by the appellants under Section 163A of the Motor Vehicles Act but contends that the meaning ascribed to the word "accident" in the Workmen"s Compensation Act by judicial pronouncements cannot be applied to the word "accident" in the Motor Vehicles Act because the object of the two Acts are differ-ent. She supported the judgment of the High Court by contending that on the facts of the present appeal, the death of the driver of the auto rickshaw was caused by felonious acts of certain unknown persons and the same is not caused by an accident arising out of the use of the vehicle. Regarding the maintainability of the appeal, she submits the judgment of this Court was reported subsequent to the High Court Judgment, hence no fault could be found with the impugned judgment on that score and no such objec-tion was taken in regard to the maintainability before the High Court.
7. As pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellants, the Motor Vehicles Act does not define the word "accident". However, Section 163A of the Motor Vehicles Act provides for payment of compensation for the death or injury suffered in a motor vehicle accident on a structured formula basis in Section 163 A of the Act. Sub-clause (I) of the said Section says that notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force or instrument having the force of law, the owner of the motor vehicle or the authorised insurer shall be liable to pay in the case of death or permanent disablement due to accident arising out of the use of motor vehicle, compensation, as indi-cated in the Second Schedule, to the legal heirs or the victim, as the case may be.
8. Sub-section (2) of the said Section also provides, in any claim for compensation under that Sub-section, the claimant shall not be required to plead or establish that the death or permanent disablement in respect of which the claim has been made was due to any wrongful act or neglect or default of the owner of the vehicle or vehicles concerned or of any other person. (emphasis supplied)
9. A conjoint reading of the above two sub-clauses of Section 163A shows that a victim or his heirs are entitled to claim from the owner/Insurance Company a compensation for death or permanent disablement suffered due to accident arising out of the use of the motor vehicle (emphasis supplied), without having to prove wrongful act or neglect or default of any one. Thus it is clear, if it is established by the claimants that the death or disable-ment was caused due to an accident arising out of the use of motor vehicle then they will be entitled for payment of compensa-tion. In the present case, the contention of the Insurance Compa-ny which was accepted by the High Court is that the death of the deceased (Dasarath Singh) was not caused by an accident arising out of the use of motor vehicle. Therefore, we will have to examine the actual legal import of the words "death due to accid-ent arising out of the use of motor vehicle". 
10. The question, therefore, is can a murder be an accident in any given case? There is no doubt that "murder", as it is understood, in the common parlance is a felonious act where death is caused with intent and the perpetrators of that act normally have a motive against the victim for such killing. But there are also instances where murder can be by accident on a given set of facts . The difference between a "murder" which is not an accid-ent and a "murder" which is an accident, depends on the proximity of the cause of such murder. In our opinion, if the dominant intention of the Act of felony is to kill any particular person then such killing is not an accidental murder but is a murder simplicitor, while if the cause of murder or act of murder was originally not intended and the same was caused in furtherance of any other felonious act then such murder is an accidental murder. 
11. In Challis v. London and South Western Railway Company ((1905 2 King"s Bench 154)), the Court of Appeal held where an engine driver while driving a train under a bridge was killed by a stone willfully dropped on the train by a boy from the bridge, that his injuries were caused by an accident. In the said case, the Court rejecting an argument that the said incident cannot be treated as an accident held:
"The accident which befell the deceased was, as it appears to me, one which was incidental to his employment as an engine driver; in other words it arose out of his employment. The argument for the respondents really involves the reading into the Act of a proviso to the effect that an accident shall not be deemed to be within the Act, if it arose from the mischievous act of a person not in the service of the employer. I see no reason to suppose that the Legislature intended so to limit the operation of the Act. The result is the same to the engine driver, from whatever cause the accident happened; and it does not appear to me to be any answer to the claim for indemnification under the Act to say that the accident was caused by some person who acted mis-chievously." 
12. In the case of Nisbet v. Rayne and Burn (1910) 1 KB 689, where a cashier, while travelling in a railway to a colliery with a large sum of money for the payment of his employers" workmen, was robbed and murdered. The Court of Appeal held:
"That the murder was an "accident" from the standpoint of the person who suffered from it and that it arose "out of" an employ-ment which involved more than the ordinary risk, and consequently that the widow was entitled to compensation under the Workmen"s Compensation Act 1906. In this case the Court followed its earlier judgment in the case of Challis (supra). In the case of Nisbet, the Court also observed that "it is contended by the employer that this was not an "accident" within the meaning of the Act, because it was an intentional felonious act which caused the death, and that the word "accident" negatives the idea of intention. In my opinion, this contention ought not to prevail. I think it was an accident from the point of view of Nisbet, and that it makes no difference whether the pistol shot was delib-erately fired at Nisbet or whether it was intended for somebody else and not for Nisbet." 
13. The judgment of the Court of Appeal in Nisbet"s case was followed by the majority judgment by the House of Lords in the case of Board of Management of Trim Joint District School v. Kelly (1914 AC 667).
14. Applying the principles laid down in the above cases to the facts of the case in hand, we find that the deceased, a driver of the auto rickshaw, was duty bound to have accepted the demand of fare paying passengers to transport them to the place of their destination. During the course of this duty, if the passengers had decided to commit an act of felony of stealing the auto rickshaw and in the course of achieving the said object of steal-ing the auto rickshaw, they had to eliminate the driver of the auto rickshaw then it cannot but be said that the death so caused to the driver of the auto rickshaw was an accidental murder. The stealing of the auto rickshaw was the object of the felony and the murder that was caused in the said process of stealing the auto rickshaw is only incidental to the act of stealing of the auto rickshaw. Therefore, it has to be said that on the facts and circumstances of this case the death of the deceased (Dasarath Singh) was caused accidentally in the process of committing the theft of the auto rickshaw.
15. Learned counsel for the respondents contended before us that since the Motor Vehicles Act has not defined the word "death" and the legal interpretations relied upon by us are with reference to definition of the word "death" in Workmen"s Compensation Act the same will not be applicable while interpreting the word "death" in Motor Vehicles Act because according to her, the objects of the two Acts are entirely different. She also contends on the facts of this case no proximity could be presumed between the murder of the driver and the stealing of the auto rickshaw. We are unable to accept this contention advanced on behalf of the respondents. We do not see how the object of the two Acts, name-ly, the Motor Vehicles Act and the Workmen"s Compensation Act are in any way different. In our opinion, the relevant object of both the Acts are to provide compensation to the victims of accidents. The only difference between the two enactments is that so far as the Workmen"s Compensation Act is concerned, it is confined to workmen as defined under that Act while the relief provided under Chapter X to XII of the Motor Vehicles Act is available to all the victims of accidents involving a motor vehicle. In this conclusion of ours we are supported by Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act as per which provision, it is open to the claimants either to proceed to claim compensation under the Workmen"s Compensation Act or under the Motor Vehicles Act. A perusal of the objects of the two enactments clearly establishes that both the enactments are beneficial enactments operating in the same field, hence judicially accepted interpretation of the word "death" in Workmen"s Compensation Act is, in our opinion, appli-cable to the interpretation of the word death in the Motor Vehi-cles Act also.
16. In the case of Shivaji Dayanu Patil and Anr. v. Vatschala Uttam More (JT 1991 (3) SC 133 = 1991 (3) SCC 530) this Court while pronouncing on the interpretation of Section 92 A of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 held as follows :
"Section 92-A was in the nature of a beneficial legislation enacted with a view to confer the benefit of expeditious payment of a limited amount by way of compensation to the victims of an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle on the basis of no fault liability. In the matter of interpretation of a beneficial legislation the approach of the courts is to adopt a construction which advances the beneficent purpose underlying the enactment in preference to a construction which tends to defeat that purpose." 
17. In that case in regard to the contention of proximity between the accident and the explosion that took place this Court held :
"This would show that as compared to the expression "caused by", the expression "arising out of" has a wider connotation. The expression "caused by" was used in Sections 95(1)(b)(i) and (ii) and 96(2)(b)(ii) of the Act. In Section 92-A, Parliament, howev-er, chose to use the expression "arising out of" which indicates that for the purpose of awarding compensation under Section 92-A, the casual relationship between the use of the motor vehicle and the accident resulting in death or permanent disablement is not required to be direct and proximate and it can be less immediate. This would imply that accident should be connected with the use of the motor vehicle but the said connection need not be direct and immediate. This construction of the expression "arising out of the use of a motor vehicle" in Section 92-A enlarges the field of protection made available to the victims of an accident and is in consonance with the beneficial object underlying the enact-ment." 
18. In the instant case, as we have noticed the facts, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the murder of the deceased (Dasarath Singh) was due to an accident arising out of the use of motor vehicle. Therefore, the trial court rightly came to the conclusion that the claimants were entitled for compensa-tion as claimed by them and the High Court was wrong in coming to the conclusion that the death of Dasarath Singh was not caused by an accident involving the use of motor vehicle.
19. This leaves us to consider the second point raised before us by the counsel for the appellant. It is argued on behalf of the appellants that the appeal preferred by the Insurance Company purported to be under Section 173 of the Motor Vehicles Act was not maintainable because prior permission of the Court as re-quired was not obtained by the appellants. In support of this contention of the appellants, reliance is placed on a judgments of this Court in the case of Shankarayya and Anr. v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and Anr. (JT 1998 (4) SC 300 = 1998 3 SCC 140). In the said 
judgment a Division Bench of this Court held :
"The Insurance Company when impleaded as a party by the Court can be permitted to contest the proceedings on merits only if the conditions precedent mentioned in Section 170 are found to be satisfied and for that purpose the Insurance Company has to obtain an order in writing from the Tribunal and which should be a reasoned order by the Tribunal. Unless that procedure is fol-lowed, the Insurance Company cannot have a wider defence on merits than what is available to it by way of statutory defence. It is true that the claimants themselves had joined Respondent 1 Insurance Company in the claim petition but that was done with a view to thrust the statutory liability on the Insurance Company on account of the contract of the insurance. That was not an order of the Court itself permitting the Insurance Company which was impleaded to avail of a larger defence on merits on being satisfied on the aforesaid two conditions mentioned in Section 170. Consequently, it must be held that on the facts of the present case, Respondent 1 Insurance Company was not entitled to file an appeal on merits of the claim which was awarded by the Tribunal." 
20. We respectfully agree with the ratio laid down in the above case and in view of the fact admittedly the Insurance Company had not obtained leave from the Tribunal before filing the above appeal. We are of the opinion that the appeal filed by the In-surance Company before the High Court was not maintainable in law. 
21. For the reasons mentioned above, this appeal succeeds, the judgment and order of the High Court dated 9.3.1998 is set aside and that of the Tribunal dated 24.6.1996 is restored. The appell-ants are entitled to costs in all the counts.
**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAW
Indian Penal Code, 1860:
Section 149 - Free fight - Murder - Assailants should be liable for their individual acts - It is unsafe to convict all of them applying section 149 for the offence of murder.
Indian Penal Code, 1860:
Sections 302/34, 307, 324 and 326 - Free fight between two groups - Murder - Assailants should be liable for their individual acts - It is unsafe to convict all of them applying section 149 for the offence of murder - Conviction and sentenc- es modified.
HELD


K. JAYACHANDRA REDDY, J. :
1. Both these appeals are directed against the judgment of the Patna High Court confirming the convictions and sentences awarded by the trial court against the appellants. In the trial court as many as 13 accused were tried for offences punishable under Sections 148, 307, 326, 302/34 and 302/149 I.P.C. The trial court convicted all of them under Sections 148 and sentenced each of them to undergo R.I. for two years. Indradeo Rai, A-1, Doman Rai, A-9 and Raj Ballav Rai, A-10 were also convicted under Sections 302/34 I.P.C. and sentenced to imprisonment for life. Upendra Rai, A-5 and Chandradip Rai, A-6 were also convicted under Sections 307 and 324 I.P.C. and were sentenced to undergo R.I. for seven years and two years respectively. Basantlal Rai, A-11 and Anuplal Rai, A-13 were also convicted under Sections 307 and 326 I.P.C. and were sentenced to undergo R.I. for seven years on each count. The sentences were directed to run concurrently. The appeal filed by them was dismissed by the High Court. During the pendency of the appeal, Chhotan Rai, A-7 died. Out of the remaining 12 convicted accused, Kashi Rai, A-2, Satrughan Rai, A-3, Sukhdeo Rai, A-4 and Gopal Rai, A-8 have preferred Criminal Appeal No. 115/84. The remaining accused have preferred Criminal Appeal No. 164/84. 
2. The prosecution case is as follows:
The accused, the main prosecution witnesses and the deceased Maksudan belong to Rasalpur Village. On 23.5.68 P.W.6, brother of P.W.15, went to see his sweet potato field in the morning and he found A-11 with his men taking out sweet potato from his field to which he objected. A-11 and his men assaulted P.W.6 and took away sweet potato. P.W.6 went to Samastipur to lodge a complaint on the same day. On 24.5.68 in the morning P.W.15 had gone to river to take his bath. He found a mob consisting of about 200 to 250 persons collected at Bariyapur Ghat and some of them were crossing the river on boat. P.W.15 became suspicious and went to P.W.11 and informed him about the same. Subsequently he learnt that the mob was collecting near Kali Asthan with an intention to loot the shops of villagers of Rasalpur. P.W.11 called P.Ws 3, 7 and 9 and the deceased and they all started for Kali Asthan. There they found a mob of about 200 to 250 persons and they tried to persuade the mob to go away but the mob started pelting brickbats on them due to which P.W.15 and others tried to move back but P.W.15 and the deceased were surrounded by the mob. A-11 assaulted P.W.15 with a Bhala on his chest. A-5 assaulted him with a Bhala on the lower portion of his leg. A-6 assaulted him on his right knee with Gupti. A-13 assaulted him with a Bhala on his head and also hit him with his gun. Meanwhile the deceased was also assaulted and he fell down. Thereafter the mob went away. P.W.15 could not say as to which of the assailants assaulted the deceased. After the mob left, the deceased was removed from the place of assault to the Pipal tree. P.W.17, the Officer-in-charge of the Mohiuddin Nagar Police Station received information at about 8.15 A.M. through a Constable P.W.5. P.W.17 went to Rasalpur Village and he also saw some persons running away. P.W.17 found P.W.15 and the deceased lying under the Pipal tree and the deceased was unconscious. He recorded the statement of P.W.15 which is the first report. In the meantime, the deceased died. P.W.17 inspected the seen of occurrence and there he found marks of trampling and foot prints and also fresh copious blood in the field. Within a short distance of 50 to 60 yards from the place of occurrence, there are other houses. In the house of Shri Sah the dead body of Ram Baran Rai belonging to the accused party was found. One Mishri Thakur, also belonging the accused party, died during the same occurrence and his dead body was found in his house and Indradeo Rai, A-1 also received injuries. P.W.17 sent the dead body of the deceased Maksudan for post-mortem and P.W.15 for treatment. P.W.18, the Doctor examined P.W.15 and found two penetrating wounds, one incised wound and two fire-arm injuries on him. P.W.19 conducted the post-mortem on the dead body of Maksudan and he found five incised wounds and one lacerated wound which was on the head and which resulted in the fracture of the skull and proved fatal. The prosecution examined 19 witnesses. Out of them P.W. 15 is the main injured witness and informant in the case and others are P.Ws 1, 3, 7, 9 and 11. The accused denied the offence and they stated that the entire occurrence took place at Village Mohanpur and not at the place as alleged by the prosecution. A-1 lodged a case against the prosecution party stating that the prosecution party caused the death of Mishri Thakur and Ram Baran Rai and also caused injuries to him. P.W.17 registered a case on the basis of the report given by A-1. He also held inquest on the dead bodies of Mishri Thakur and Ram Baran Rai and also got A-1 examined. Two defence witnesses were examined on behalf of the accused to prove their case.
3. The Sessions Court, however, accepted the prosecution case and held that the accused were the aggressors and accordingly held them guilty and the same has been upheld by the High Court.
4. From the above stated facts, it can be seen that the occurrence did take place on 24.5.68 at about 9 A.M. during which the deceased Maksudan on the side of the prosecution party died and P.W.15 received several injuries and on the accused side, Mishri Thakur and Ram Baran Rai died and A-1 also sustained injuries. The main question that arose for consideration before the trial court as well as the High Court was as to who were the aggressors.
5. P.W.15 is the main witness who was injured and who gave the report. In the FIR, though he mentioned the names of some of the accused, he did not mention as to who attacked the deceased and he mentioned only the names of his assailants. The other main eye-witnesses admittedly were examined a week after the occurrence. Each party tried to throw the blame on the other. The High Court relying on the evidence of P.Ws 1, 3, 7, 9 and 15 held that the accused persons collected themselves into a mob and they commenced the fight. Shri Justice Uday Sinha, one of the members of the Division Bench of the High Court, however, wrote a separate but concurring judgment. He gave a finding that the parties fought and the crucial matter to be found out is as to who started the fight.
6. It must be noted that the prosecution did not explain as to how the two persons on the side of the accused died and how A-1 received injuries. The learned Judges of the High Court proceeded on the footing that though there was a fight between the two groups, it was accused party who started the fight and therefore it alone must be treated as the aggressors and consequently must be held guilty. But taking into consideration all the facts and surrounding circumstances of the case to us it looks as though it was a free fight where both the parties collected into groups with the determination to fight. In such a situation as to who started fight is not very material.
7. In such a situation though it can be held that there was an unlawful assembly to the extent of committing a rioting but the common object of the every member of the unlawful assembly cannot be said to commit murder. In a case of free fight of such nature, the assailants should be liable for their individual acts and it may be unsafe to convict all of them by applying Section 149 for the offence of murder. In the instance case, P.W.15 who gave the first information report has not mentioned any of the accused as having attacked the deceased. It is only one week later, the other interested witnesses have come forward with the version that A-1, A-9 and A-10 attacked the deceased Maksudan. But it is highly unsafe to accept this version. A-1 also gave a report almost immediately naming some of the prosecution witnesses as the assailants of the two deceased persons Mishri Thakur and Ram Baran Rai and in the version given by the prosecution, in the instant case, A-1 is named as the principal assailant as far as attack on the deceased Maksudan is concerned. We think it is highly unsafe to convict A-1, A-9 and A-10 for the offence of murder of deceased Maksudan under Sections 302/34 I.P.C. However, their presence in the unlawful assembly cannot be doubted. Now, coming to the attack on P.W.15, both the courts below have held A-5, A-6, A-11 and A-13 guilty under Sections 307, 324 and 326 I.P.C. Learned counsel appearing for the appellants could not persuade us as to why the same can not be accepted. P.W.15"s evidence is corroborated by the medical evidence and he has also mentioned the names of these accused in the FIR which was promptly given. P.W.15 will be the last person to leave out his own assailants and implicate others falsely.
8. Accordingly we set aside the conviction of Indradeo Rai, A-1, Doman Rai, A-9 and Raj Ballav Rai, A-10 under Sections 302/34 I.P.C. and sentence of imprisonment of life awarded thereunder. Their conviction under Section 148 I.P.C. and the sentence of two years" R.I. is, however, confirmed. All the other convictions and sentences awarded against the other appellants are also confirmed. But the sentence of sevens years" R.I. awarded against A-5 and A-6 under Section 307 I.P.C. is reduced to five years" R.I. Likewise the sentence of seven years" R.I. each under Sections 307 and 326 I.P.C. awarded against A-11 and A-13 is reduced to five years" R.I. under each count. All the sentences shall run concurrently. Subject to the above modification of sentences, both the appeals are disposed of.
**********
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAWS
Evidence Act, 1872
Section 27 - Recovery of bloodstained clothes - Murder case -  As per prosecution, blood group on the clothes matched with blood on the bed sheet on which one of the dead bodies was found - Though blood of both deceased sent for examination, no blood report produced - Neither blood group of deceased nor that of accused persons ascertained. Held, mere matching of the blood group, did not prove culpability of appellant. (Para 8)
Sections 25, 27 - Recovery of deceased's sister's laptop from appellant's house - Murder case. Held, mere recovery of laptop does not indicate that appellant is responsible for murder. Under Section 27 only so much of recovery, as a result of the disclosure statement, which directly pertains to the commission of crime is relevant. Otherwise, such an evidence is barred under Section 25. Laptop is neither weapon of crime nor has any cause of connection with the commission of crime. Jaffar Hussain Dastagir's case. [1969 (2) SCC 872], referred.
Murder case - Fingerprints of appellant on cello tape found in deceased's house - Print marked 'D' on cello tape matched with specimen of the appellant - However,  in the court it was found that print 'D' was missing on the cello tape roll.  Held, print 'D' could not be relied upon. Print marks 'A' to 'C' were unfit for comparison. Therefore, the circumstance was not proved. (Paras 9-10)
Murder case - Absence of motive - Allegedly accused, a jilted lover, had killed his girlfriend and mother with the help of appellant. Held, in absence of motive and incriminating circumstance and weak linkage of appellant's alleged friendship with A1, he is to be given benefit of doubt. (Para 10)

CASES REFERRED
1.  Jaffar Hussain Dastagir v. State of Maharashtra [1969 (2) SCC 872] (Para 8)


A.K. SIKRI, J.
1. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length.
2. For the purpose of this appeal, it is not necessary to state the facts of the matter in detail. Suffice it to state that the appellant was charged under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’) for committing the murder of Anusha Sarkar and her mother Maya Sarkar.
3. As per the prosecution, there was love affair between Subhankar Sarkar (hereinafter referred to as ‘A1’) and Anusha Sarkar. However, this relationship was not acceptable to the mother of Anusha Sarkar who advised Anusha to sever her relation from A1. A1 did not like this move on the part of Anusha Sarkar and this became the motive for A1 to finish Anusha Sarkar as well as her mother. Insofar as the incident of murder is concerned, it came to light in the following manner:
4. As Anusha Sarkar did not respond to A1, A1 along with his friend Debapriya Pal (appellant herein) on the fateful day when Anusha’s mother, i.e. Maya Sarkar, was alone in the house – ‘Kalamban’ in Air View Complex, P.S. English Bazar, Malda, committed her murder and then waited for Anusha Sarkar to come and after she arrived, she was also brutally murdered by them. On the next day, i.e. 27.09.07, in the morning when their maid servant Saraswati Sarkar came to the house she saw the dead bodies of Smt. Maya Sarkar and Anusha Sarkar in their bedroom with bleeding injuries and raised an alarm. On hearing her cry, Nabarun Paul, their driver came into the house and saw the dead bodies. These two servants informed the police, neighbours and relations of Smt. Maya Sarkar. In the meantime, Ananya Sarkar, elder daughter of deceased Maya Sarkar who was prosecuting her studies outside Malda was informed. Sujit Sarkar, brother-in-law of Smt. Maya Sarkar, lodged a written complaint of the incident to the English Bazar Police Station. The police registered a case on the basis of the aforesaid information.
5. As per the prosecution, during investigation the aforesaid facts of love affair between Anusha Sarkar and A1 surfaced because of which A1 became a suspect. He was arrested. The appellant was also roped in on the ground that he was a friend of A1 and has helped A1 to commit the said double murder. Both the accused persons denied the charge which led to the trial against them. As many as, 38 witnesses were examined. We may also record at this stage that after their arrest, both the accused had made disclosure statements which led to certain recoveries. After analyzing the depositions of these witnesses as well as recoveries, the Trial Court came to a conclusion that the prosecution was able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt against both the accused persons under Sections 302/201/380/411 of the IPC and awarded the sentence of death to both of them. Death reference was made to the High Court for confirmation of the sentence. Both the accused persons filed appeals in the High Court. The High Court vide the impugned judgment has confirmed the conviction of A1 as well as the appellant. However, insofar as award of death sentence by the Trial Court is concerned, the same is modified to that of rigorous imprisonment for life. The appellant as well as A1 had challenged the judgment of the High Court by filing special leave petitions. The special leave petition of A1 was dismissed by this Court. In this manner, as far as conviction and sentence awarded to A1 is concerned, that has attained finality. In the Special Leave Petition filed by the appellant, leave was granted. That is how the present appeal comes up for final hearing.
6. It is clear from the aforesaid that there is no eye witness to the crime and the conviction is based on circumstantial evidence. It also becomes clear that no direct motive is attributed to the appellant herein. As per the prosecution, the motive to commit the crime was with A1 who could not digest the stand of Anusha Sarkar’s mother because of which Anusha Sarkar parted the company of A1. We need not to discuss the evidence that was led and proved against A1 since his special leave petition has already been dismissed. Insofar as the appellant is concerned, the only reason given is that he was a friend of A1 and that is why he joined A1 in commission of the said crime. We may state at the outset that after examining the testimonies of the witnesses on this particular aspect, we find that it is not very strong inasmuch as the nature of friendship and the thickness of such friendship has not come on record. One of the witnesses has stated in a cursory manner that he had seen the appellant in the company of A1 on certain occasions.
7. Insofar as other material/evidence, which is led against the appellant and can become the basis of his conviction is concerned, we find that there are three circumstances which weighed with the Trial Court to convict the appellant. These are:
     1. Recovery of blood stained clothes of the appellant from his house on his disclosure statement.
     2. Recovery of laptop belonging to the sister (PW 23) of the deceased Anusha Sarkar from the house of the appellant with cushion cover.
     3. Finger prints of the appellant on the cello tape which was found in the house of the deceased.
8. As far as recovery of blood stained clothes is concerned, two public witnesses are examined who, purportedly, were the witnesses to the seizure list of wearing apparels of the appellant. These are PW-12 and PW13. According to their deposition, they saw the policemen along with the accused person going to the house of the appellant and they also joined the police party. It is how they became the witnesses and were associated with the recovery. For the sake of argument, we are presuming that they were present at the time when the appellant brought blood stained clothes from his house and gave the same to the police. What is material is the reliance on these blood stained clothes for the culpability of the appellant herein. As per the prosecution, the blood group on these blood stained clothes matched with the blood on the bed sheet on which the body of one of the deceased person is found. The record reveals that though blood of both the deceased persons was drawn and sent for examination, it is not known as to what was the report thereupon and what was the blood group of the deceased persons. No such blood report has been produced. So much so, blood group of the accused persons was also not ascertained. Even if we presume that the blood on the bed sheet was that of the deceased, the possibility cannot be ruled out that the same blood group as of the accused appellant thereof. Therefore, mere matching of the blood group on the blood stained clothes, which was even on the bed sheet, would not lead to the conclusion that it is the appellant who had committed the crime. Same reasoning goes with the recovery of laptop as well. Merely because laptop belonging to the sister of the deceased Anusha Sarkar is not indicative that the appellant is responsible for the commission of the crime. Under Section 27 of the Evidence Act only so much of recovery, as a result of the disclosure statement, which directly pertains to the commission of crime is relevant. Otherwise, such an evidence is barred under Section 25 of the Evidence Act. Recovery of laptop does not have any bearing. It is neither the weapon of crime nor it has any cause of connection with the commission of crime. The law on this aspect is succinctly said in the case Jaffar Hussain Dastagir v. State of Maharashtra [1969 (2) SCC 872] in the following manner:
     “5. Under Section 25 of the Evidence Act no confession made by an accused to a police officer can be admitted in evidence against him. An exception to this is however provided by Section 26 which makes a confessional statement made before a Magistrate admissible in evidence against an accused notwithstanding the fact that he was in the custody of the police when he made the incriminating statement. Section 27 is a proviso to Section 26 and makes admissible so much of the statement of the accused which leads to the discovery of a fact deposed to by him and connected with the crime, irrespective of the question whether it is confessional or otherwise. The essential ingredient of the section is that the information given by the accused must lead to the discovery of the fact which is the direct outcome of such information. Secondly, only such portion of the information given as is distinctly connected with the said recovery is admissible against the accused. Thirdly, the discovery of the fact must relate to the commission of some offence.“
9. Third ingredient does not seem to have been satisfied. As far as finger prints on the cello tape are concerned, the report is that print marked 'D' on cello tape matched with specimen of the appellant and prints marked 'A' to 'C' were unfit for comparison and print 'B' did not match with either of the accused.
10. From the aforesaid, it is clear that only on print mark 'D', the finger prints were found to be matching with the specimen of the appellant. However, what is significant is that in the court it was found that print 'D' was missing on the cello tape roll. In view thereof, print 'D' could not be relied upon. Insofar as print marks 'A' to 'C' are concerned, the report of the expert is that they were unfit for comparison. Therefore, this circumstance has also not been satisfactorily proved. In the absence of any motive on the part of the appellant, weak linkage of his alleged friendship with A1 and hardly any circumstance clinching to point accusing finger on the appellant, we are of the opinion that the appellant should have been given the benefit of doubt as his culpability has not been proved by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt.
11. For these reasons, we allow this appeal and set aside the conviction. Since the appellant is in jail he shall be released forthwith.
**********
CROSS CITATION
1997 (9) SCC 119
1996 (9) (Suppl) SCR 537
APPEARANCES
N.N.Keshwani and Mr. R.N.Keshwani, Advocates for the Appellants.
Mr. U.N.Bachawat, Senior Advocate, (Mr. Prashant Kumar) Advocate for Uma Nath Singh, Advocate with him for the Respondent
HEADNOTE
CRIMINAL LAW
Indian Penal Code - Sections 302/149, 141 - unlawful assembly formed by appellants with other unknown persons with common intention of murder - Held appreciation of evidenced PW9, the mother by both courts below is proper - PW9 an interested witness has her evidence corroborated by PW8 & PW10, the doctor performï¿½ing autopsy - No error committed by High Court in relying on evidence of sole eye witness - All three appellants were together at scene of the crime and did share the common intention of committing murder - Intention was established from record and so the a distinct charge was framed with the aid of Section 34 - Whether there was evidence of unlawful assembly of three - Folï¿½lowing Dhanna etc. v. State of M.P. (JT 1996 (6) SC 652 convicï¿½tion altered from Section 302/149 to Section 302/34 and convicï¿½tion under Section 148 set aside - Sentence of life imprisonment maintained.
HELD
The opinion of the High Court that these three appellants formed an unlawful assembly with some "other unknown persons", is based on no evidence as it is not the prosecution case that besides the 13 named persons, there was any other 'unknown' persons also who had shared the common object with the appellants for committing the murder of Mohan Lal. The High Court was, therefore, not legally justified in convicting the appellants under sections 148 and 302 /149 I.P.C. However, we find that the manner in which the incident took place clearly indicates that the appellants had shared the common intention of committing the murder of Mohan Lal. They would therefore be liable for the said murder with the aid of Section 34 I.P.C. We may notice here that these three appellants are the ones who had been specifically named by P.W.9 to have assaulted deceased Mohan Lal. All the three were together at the scene of the crime as deposed to by P.W.8 also. The evidence of P.W.9 that Jiwan Lal and Halkoi had fired upon the deceased while Dashrath had caused an injury on him with a farsa, has been found established from the medical evidence of P.W.10. Thus, there is no manner of doubt that the three appellants did share the common intention of committing murder of Mohan Lal. The appellants along with other as already noticed, had been charged for the said murder of sharing the common object with the aid of section 149 I.P.C. No prejudice has been shown to have been caused to the appellants for not framing a distinct charge with the aid of section 34 I.P.C., as intention which is a question of fact, has to be gathered from the evidence and the evidence on the record clearly establishes that the appellants did share the common intention of committing the murder of Mohan Lal. In Dhanna etc. v. State of Madhya Pradesh (JT 1996(6) SC 652),[Para 5]

CASES REFERRED
Dhanna etc. v. State of Madhya Pradesh [JT 1996(6) SC 652] (Para 5)


ORDER


1. The appellants along with 10 others were tried for various offences including offences under sections 148 and 302/149 I.P.C. in respect of an occurrence dated 11th June, 1984 in which deï¿½ceased Mohan Lal received fatal injuries. The Trial Court vide judgment of 1st June, 1985, acquitted two co-accused but convictï¿½ed 11 for various offences including offences under sections 148 and 302/149 I.P.C. They were sentenced to undergo life imprisonï¿½ment. All the 11 convicts filed appeal in the High Court against their conviction and sentence. On 9th December, 1989, Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeal of 8 convicts and acquitted them by giving them the benefit of doubt. So far as the three appellants herein are concerned, their conviction was maintained for the offences under section 302/149 I.P.C. The High Court opined that these three appellants had formed an unlawful assembly with 'other unknown persons' with the common object of committing murder of Mohan Lal as alleged by the prosecution. By special leave, the appellants have filed this appeal.

2. We have heard Mr. Keshwani, learned counsel appearing for the appellants and Mr. U.N.Bachawat, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent and examined the record.

3. The Trial Court as well as the High Court relied upon the testimony of Swami P.W.8, brother of Mohan Lal and Saraswati, P.W.9, the mother of the deceased. It was found by the Courts below that on the fateful day of 11th June, 1984 at about 8.00 a.m., the appellants armed with guns and a farsa attacked the deceased while he was proceeding with his brother Swami P.W.8 towards the betel grove. The Trial Court as well as the High Court found that P.W.8 and P.W.9 had given a correct account relating to the assault and while P.W.9 had specifically stated that appellants Jiwan Lal and Holkoi fired upon the deceased, Dashrath hit him with a farsa. P.W.8 Swami has corroborated P.W.9 by deposing that he had seen these accused along with others variously armed by the side of his brother who was lying on the ground. The submission of Mr. Keshwani that the courts below committed an error in relying upon the testimony of P.W.9, the solitary eye witness, as according to him, she was an interested witness and since she had implicated 10 other accused also, her testimony could not be relied upon, does not appeal to us. He referred to certain judgments of this Court to urge that convicï¿½tion could not be based on the testimony of sole eye witness, who has been disbelieved in respect of a part of the occurrence or who has been found to be otherwise interested in the prosecution.

4. It is found from a perusal of the record that the evidence of Saraswati P.W.9 in so far as the part attributed to the apï¿½pellants is concerned, is cogent and consistent and is also corroborated by P.W.8 as well as by the medical evidence. The names of 3 appellants were also clearly disclosed in the promptly lodged F.I.R., Ex.P-16. It is settled law that conviction can be based on the sole testimony of an eye witness provided that testimony is found to be wholly reliable. Where the testimony of such a witness is partly reliable, prudence requires that corrobï¿½oration of the testimony of that witness should be sought for from independent sources to base the conviction. Indeed, P.W.9 is the mother of the deceased. She is, therefore, an interested witness. Prudence, as such, requires that we look for corroboraï¿½tion of her testimony. We find that such corroboration is amply provided for both by P.W.8 and Dr. Ramesh Kumar P.W.10 who had performed the Autopsy on the dead body. Both the Trial Court and the High Court committed no error in relying upon her testimony which has been corroborated by other evidence on the record to convict the appellants. The appreciation of evidence by both the courts below is proper and we have not been persuaded to take a different view. Merely because, 10 other persons named by her as accused were acquitted, would not render her testimony as wholly suspect because falsus in uno falsus in omnibus is not rule of law accepted by the courts in this country. That apart, we find that the High Court has opined that since the testimony of P.W.9 had not been supported by the medical evidence in so far as the injuries attributed to the other 10 accused is concerned, thereï¿½fore, the benefit of doubt was required to be given to them and they were acquitted.

5. Learned counsel for the appellants then submitted that the conviction of the appellants by the courts below for offences under sections 148 and 302/149 I.P.C, cannot be sustained. Indeed, according to the positive case of the prosecution, all the 13 arraigned accused were the miscreants. With the acquittal of 10 of them (two by the Trial Court and eight by the High Court), the conviction of the remaining three under sections 148 and 302/149 I.P.C. is not permissible as the assembly of three only would not be an unlawful assembly within the meaning of section 141 I.P.C. The opinion of the High Court that these three appellants formed an unlawful assembly with some "other unknown persons", is based on no evidence as it is not the prosecution case that besides the 13 named persons, there was any other 'unknown' persons also who had shared the common object with the appellants for committing the murder of Mohan Lal. The High Court was, therefore, not legally justified in convicting the appellï¿½ants under sections 148 and 302 /149 I.P.C. However, we find that the manner in which the incident took place clearly indicates that the appellants had shared the common intention of committing the murder of Mohan Lal. They would therefore be liable for the said murder with the aid of Section 34 I.P.C. We may notice here that these three appellants are the ones who had been specificalï¿½ly named by P.W.9 to have assaulted deceased Mohan Lal. All the three were together at the scene of the crime as deposed to by P.W.8 also. The evidence of P.W.9 that Jiwan Lal and Halkoi had fired upon the deceased while Dashrath had caused an injury on him with a farsa, has been found established from the medical evidence of P.W.10. Thus, there is no manner of doubt that the three appellants did share the common intention of committing murder of Mohan Lal. The appellants along with other as already noticed, had been charged for the said murder of sharing the common object with the aid of section 149 I.P.C. No prejudice has been shown to have been caused to the appellants for not framing a distinct charge with the aid of section 34 I.P.C., as intention which is a question of fact, has to be gathered from the evidence and the evidence on the record clearly establishes that the appellants did share the common intention of committing the murder of Mohan Lal. In Dhanna etc. v. State of Madhya Pradesh (JT 1996(6) SC 652), Thomas, J speaking for the bench, while dealing with a similar aspect, after referring to a catena of authorities observed:

"Legal position on this aspect remained uncertain for a time after this court rendered a decision in Nanak Chand v. The State of Punjab, 1995 (1) SCR 1201. But the doubt was cleared by a constitution bench of this Court in Willie Slaney v. State of M.P., AIR 1956 SC 116, where this Court observed at para 86, thus:

"Sections 34, 114 and 149 of the Indian Penal Code provide for criminal liability viewed from different angles as regards actual participants, accessories and men actuated by a common object or a common intention; and the charge is a rolled-up one involving the direct liability and the constructive liability without specifying who are directly liable and who are sought to be made constructively liable.

In such a situation, the absence of a charge under one or other of the various heads of criminal liability for the offence cannot be said to be fatal by itself, and before a conviction for the substantive offence, without a charge, can be set aside, prejudice will have to be made out. In most of the cases of this kind, evidence is normally given from the outset as to who was primarily responsible for the act which brought about the offence and such evidence is of course relevant."

6.It is therefore, open to the court to take recourse to section 34 I.P.C. even if the said section was not specifically mentioned in the charge and instead section 149 I.P.C. has been included. Of course a finding that the assailant concerned had a common intention with the other accused is necessary for resorting to such a course. This view was followed by this court in later decisions also. (Amar Singh v. State of Haryana, AIR 1973 SC 2221, Bhoor Singh and Anr. v. State of Punjab, AIR 1974 SC 1256). The first submission of the learned counsel for the appellant has no merit."

7.The view expressed above lends support to the view taken by us. Under the circumstances, the conviction of the appellants is altered from under Section 302/149 I.P.C. to the one under Secï¿½tion 302/34 I.P.C. while maintaining the sentence of life imprisï¿½onment. The conviction and sentence of the appellants for the offence under Section 148 IPC is however set aside, but in all other respects, their conviction and sentence is maintained. As a result of the above discussion, except for the alternation made above, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.

8.The appellants are on bail. Their bail bonds shall stand canï¿½celled. They shall be taken into custody to undergo the remaining part of the sentence.

**********
