HEADNOTE CRIMINAL LAW Indian Penal Code Sections 32 364 363 Held prosecution has failed to prove by evidence motive or recovery and evidence led about last seen together is not consistent with guilt of appellants re offence of murder Evidence is conclusive only about kidnapping of deceased but not for murder As prosecution failed to prove offence of murder conviction under Section 302 is set aside Further kid napping is not with intention to commit murder So conviction under Section 364 set aside but convicted them of offence of kidnapping under Section 363 IPC and sentenced to under go rigorous imprisonment for five years. HELD The evidence led by the prosecution about last seen together cannot be said to be consistent only with the hypothe sis of the guilt of the appellants as regards the offence of murder and incapable of being explained on any other hypothesis. In our opinion the evidence led by the prosecution is of a con clusive nature so far as kidnapping of the deceased is concerned but is inconclusive so far as the offence of murder is concerned. The chain of evidence is not so complete as to leave no doubt about the conclusion that the appellants also committed the murder of Avadhesh. May be they did but that is not enough. The prosecution is obliged to establish that in all human probability the accused alone had committed the murder. This the prosecution has failed to prove in this case. The conviction of the appell ants for the offence under Section 302 IPC therefore cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside. So far as the conviction of the appellants for offence under Section 364 IPC is concerned that too cannot be sustained because the kidnapping of the de ceased by the appellants cannot said to be with the intention to commit his murder. However since we have accepted the evidence of PW.1 PW.5 and PW.7 and partly the statement of PW.9 and PW. 10 the prosecution can be said to have successfully established beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellants committed an of fence under Section 363 IPC. Para 10 ORDER 1.These appeals are directed against the judgment of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh dated 8th April 1994 dismissing the appeals filed by the appellants against their conviction and sentence as recorded by the learned Session Judge on 18th Janu ary 1991. The appellants were convicted of offences under sec tions 364 and 302 IPC and were sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. 500 and in default two months simple imprisonment on the first count and to life impris onment and a fine of Rs. 1 000 and in default three months simple imprisonment on the second count. 2.The prosecution case in brief is that on 2nd September 1987 at about 9.15 p.m. Ramgovind Sharma PW. 9 lodged a report at P.S. Jhansi Road regarding the missing of his son Avadhesh Sharma who had gone to the school but had not returned. He gave the descrip tion and identification of his son in the report. After registra tion of the missing person report Ext. P 3 an intimation was sent to the Control Room. During the investigation statements of various prosecution witnesses including Ram Bharose Bajpayee PW. 1 and Rati Ram PW. 7 were recorded. According to their state ments they had seen Avadhesh along with the appellants near Ravi Shankar Hostel Medical Tiraha. On the basis of this information a search was made for the appellants. They were not found at their houses. A case under Section 364 34 IPC was registered on 3rd September 1987 at 1 O clock at night. A search was started and ultimately the dead body of Avadhesh was found between the bushes and trees in the Chattri. A panchnama of the dead body was prepared and the dead body was sent for post mortem examination. Dr. V.K. Deewan P.W. conducted the post mortem examination and found a number of injuries on his person. According to his opin ion death of the deceased had occurred on account of strangula tion and the injuries on his chest which had led to failure of respiratory system. The appellants came to be arrested during the investigation on 6th September 1987. Gauri Shankar appellant is alleged to have made a disclosure statement which is admissi ble under Section 27 of the Evidence Act leading to the recovery of a watch which according to the prosecution was on the person of the deceased when he left for school in the morning of 2nd September 1987. Mohan appellant allegedly made a statement admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act leading to the recovery of a pen while Veerandra appellant allegedly made a statement admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act leading to the recovery of a dot pen. No recovery was effected from Ashok appellant. 3.The recovered articles were sent to the police station for identification and Shri B.K. Agrawal Naib Tehsildar PW. 11 conducted an identification parade in the Tehsil Office of Gwa lior on 18th September 1987. Ramgovind Sharma PW. 9 and his wife Saroj PW. 10 identified the seized articles as the ones which the deceased was carrying with him on the day of the occur rence. After completion of the investigation the appellants were sent up for trial and convicted and sentenced as already noticed. 4.There is no eye witness in the case. Both the trial court and the High Court have relied upon the following circumstances to connect the appellants with the crime i motive ii the deceased having been last seen in the company of the accused iii recoveries of articles belonging to the deceased iv factum of absconding on the part of the deceased. 5.Both the courts found all the circumstances to have been estab lished from the evidence on the record and hold that the circum stances conclusively established that the appellants were guilty of the offences with which they had been charged. 6.We have heard learned counsel for the parties and examined the record. MOTIVE 7.According to the prosecution case the motive for murder of Avadhesh is stated to be that the brother of Ashok Kumar appell ant was involved in a hurt case by Khemraj Varun and Ramgovind Sharma PW.9 was a witness in that case. It is alleged that on 1st September 1987 i.e. a day before the occurrence the appell ants warned PW.9 that he should not appear as a witness in Khem raj Varun s case but since PW.9 declined to oblige the appell ants they kidnapped Avadhesh and committed his murder. This motive to our minds is much too feeble. The prosecution had not led any evidence to show as to how the other appellants were connected with Ashok appellant. In the report Ext. P 3 there is no mention of the alleged motive. It is not even mentioned in the FIR. At the trial also PW.10 Saroj mother of the deceased improved upon her earlier version to support the statement of PW. 9 in this behalf. There is no other evidence on the record to prove the existence of motive. This circumstance has in our opinion not been proved and even otherwise it does not appear that there was any sufficient motive for the appellants to commit the murder of the only son of PW. 9 only because PW. 9 had to appear as a witness against the brother of Ashok appellant. RECOVERIES 8.The prosecution has relied upon the recovery of watch Ext. P 8 Pen Ext. P 9 and a dot pen Ext. P 12 allegedly on the dis closure statements made by Gauri Shankar Mohan and Veerandra which are admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. The only witness for the recovery examined at the trial apart from Mahender Partap Singh PW. 12 the Investigating Officer is Parmal Singh PW. 6 who does not belong to the locality and who could give no satisfactory explanation for his presence at the relevant time at the police station where the disclosure state ments were allegedly made. The prosecution has attempted to connect the pen Ext. P 9 and the dot pen Ext. P 12 which are of a common make with the deceased on the strength of the in scription of his name on the same. The investigating officer admitted in his cross examination that the price of the pen and the dot pen was about Rs. 1 or Rs. 2 in the market and the same were easily available. Parmal Singh PW. 6 did not depose at the trial that when the pers were recovered allegedly on the pointing out of th appellants Mohan and Veerendra they contained the name of Avadhesh inscribed on them . That the pen and the dot pen contained the inscription of the name of Avadhesh is a later improvement introduced at the trial. This renders the story of recovery of the pen and dot pen doubtful. So far as the recovery of the watch is concerned there is no mention about the watch in the FIR. Watch P. 8 is a ladies writ watch. At the trial PW. 9 tried to explain that the said watch had been purchased by him for his wife Saroj PW. 10 and the deceased was wearing that watch on his writs when he went to school. It appears to be also an after thought because if that was so there was no reason for PW. 9 not to have disclosed in the FIR that the deceased was wearing the watch. It appears to us that the recoveries are not free from doubt and the same appear to have been pressed into aid to buttress the prosecution s case. The evidence of Parmal Singh PW. 6 when considered in the established facts and circumstances of the case creates a doubt about his creditworthiness and consequently about the genuineness of the recoveries. We are therefore unable to place any reliance on the recoveries and hold that the recoveries do not connect the appellants with the crime. ABSCONDING 9.So far as the evidence of absconding is concerned this again is wholly discrepant and fragile. According to the prosecution case the occurrence took place on 2nd September 1987. The appellants were arrested according to the prosecution on 6th September 1987 although the defence has led evidence to show that on 3rd September 1987 one of the appellants was already in custody of the police. Be that as it may the arrest of the appellants on 6th September 1987 when the case was registered under section 364 34 IPC only during the night intervening 3rd 4th September 1987 cannot be considered to be such a circumstance which con nects the appellants with the murder of the deceased and is consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the appell ants. This circumstance also therefore has to be ruled out of consideration to connect the appellants with the offence of murder. LAST SEEN TOGETHER 10.Ram Bharose Vajpayee PW.1 deposed that he saw the appellants alongwith the deceased on cycle near Katora Tal. Rati Ram PW. 7 also deposed to having seen the deceased with the appellants near Katora Tal. Both the courts have relied upon the statements of P.W.1 and PW.7 in that behalf after giving cogent reasons. So far as PW.5 is concerned he did not depose that he had seen the deceased with the appellant but according to him he had seen the appellants outside the Chhatri on the fateful day. The evi dence of PW.1 PW.5 and PW.7 has been rightly relied upon by the courts below but the same can only go to show that the appellants had kidnapped the deceased on the fateful day and nothing more than that. The evidence of these witnesses even if accepted in their totality does not go to connect the appellants with the crime of murder. Indeed Avdhesh Kumar s death was homicidal in nature but unless the prosecution can establish beyond a reason able doubt that the appellants and the appellants alone had committed the murder their conviction for an offence under section 302 IPC cannot be sustained. The evidence led by the prosecution about last seen together cannot be said to be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the appell ants as regards the offence of murder and incapable of being explained on any other hypothesis. In our opinion the evidence led by the prosecution is of a conclusive nature so far as kid napping of the deceased is concerned but is inconclusive so far as the offence of murder is concerned. The chain of evidence is not so complete as to leave no doubt about the conclusion that the appellants also committed the murder of Avadhesh. May be they did but that is not enough. The prosecution is obliged to establish that in all human probability the accused alone had committed the murder. This the prosecution has failed to prove in this case. The conviction of the appellants for the offence under section 302 IPC therefore cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside. So far as the conviction of the appellants for offence under section 364 IPC is concerned that too cannot be sustained because the kidnapping of the deceased by the appellants cannot said to be with the intention to commit his murder. However since we have accepted the evidence of PW.1 PW. 5 and PW. 7 and partly the statement of PW. 9 and PW. 10 the prosecution can be said to have successfully established beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellants committed an offence under section 363 IPC. 11.We accordingly while setting aside the conviction and sen tence of the appellants for the offence under sections 312 and 364 IPC convict them of the offence under section 363 IPC and sentence them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years. In case the appellants have undergone the sentence as imposed by us they shall be released from custody forthwith if not required in any other case. 