. Mr. Divatia as amicus curice in support of the reference argues that, firstly, the accused's statement as that of a lady of position should be preferred that she did not even dissuade customers, secondly, that in any case, her object was the object of all temperance workers, viz., to dissuade people from drink as a poison physical, mental and moral, and that such an act with such an object is not ' molestation ' within Section 3.

5. It is contended by the learned Government Pleader that the words in the section ' with a view' do not mean merely the immediate object or purpose, but include more remote consequences, and that as persistent dissuasion of people from resorting to liquor shops may result in the closing of the business, such a consequence is a view within the meaning of Section 3, and the accused's action is, therefore, molestation.

6. We assume for the purposes of the present case that the accused was standing near the shop in order to dissuade would-be customers, if she could, from resorting for drink to that shop. The question is whether on these facts she is guilty of molestation under Section 3 of Ordinance V of 1930.

7. The arguments have gone somewhat far and various hypothetical cases have been placed before us. Speaking for myself, it is preferable, I think, in interpreting the law, to confine ourselves strictly to the facts found above and to see whether they do or do not fall within the legal definition of the offence. We are not concerned in this Court with considerations political or religious on either side. To a Mahommedan like the accused, drink is strictly forbidden by her religion ; and discussion at least of her co-religionists may be a sacred duty. On the other hand, Government derives a large revenue from excise and is to that extent interested in the free sale of liquor. But it was conceded by the learned Government Pleader that the definition on his interpretation was wide enough and in fact it obviously followed from his argument that a temperance worker, who had no other object except to reduce the evil of drink, would be guilty of molestation under the Ordinance.

8. The Ordinance in express terms is to provide against certain forms of intimidation, and the word 'intimidate' occurs in Section 8 and in various other places. Section 3 runs as follows [after quoting the section the judgment proceeded:]

9. In the present case, the accused is found to have molested the shopkeeper, because with a view to cause the shopkeeper to close his shop, which he had a right to keep open, she loitered near the shop where he carried on the business of selling liquor. She is not found to have molested any particular customer; and it was not argued for the Crown that it was open to us to alter the finding and conviction into molestation of the customer, The question reduces itself to this, whether the accused's at' tempts to persuade people of the evils of drink and to dissuade them from resorting to the shop, could be said to be with a view to cause the shopkeeper to close his shop. There is no particular magic, in my opinion, in the word 'view', 'View' is de fined by Webster as 'that which is looked towards or kept in sight as an object.' Intention, purpose, object and view are all allied. In this section as in other penal sections, the view or the object has to be inferred from the acts. There is no evidence here whatever to show that the accused had any knowledge of the shopkeeper, or that the shopkeeper was in sight, or that she, in any way, molested him in the sense in which the word ' is employed in its ordinary sense. 'Molestation' is defined in Webster as an act of molesting, or statfe of being molested, disturbance, annoyance, hostile, pestering or vexatious interference, fee. Usually the person molested is the person accosted and pestered. It is admitted by the learned Government Pleader that wide as are the words 'anyone in whom such person is interested' a possible customer is not a person in whom the shopkeeper is interested or vice versa. If so, it is clear from the words 'such other person' in Section 3 that the person molested must be the same person as the person to whose legal rights obstruction is to be caused. If the section is analysed and applied, the result is as follows:

11. On the ordinary canons of interpretation it is not open to us to consider the statement of objects and reasons in the case of an Ordinance any more than in the case of an Act. If the Legislature or the Governor General desires to make temperance work, by which I mean dissuasion 'of people from drink, a penal offence, the intention must be clearer than it is in the present definition of 'molestation' in Section 3.

12. The difficulty really arises from the fact that the words "to molest another person who, with a view to cause such other person" necessarily mean that the second ''such other person" must be identical with the "another person" molested. It is not, therefore, permissible here to jump in one place from the customer to the shopkeeper in another place. The molestation and interference must be of one and the same person in the case of a single offence. The definition is, no doubt, wide, There are certain words such as, "anyone in whom such person is interested" or even "loiter" which are so wide that they are difficult of definition, and, indeed, of application. It often happens that sections, which are widely worded, are from their nature loosely worded and loopholes result. It is not for us, however, because of the width of the definition or of the loopholes, to depart from the plain meaning of the words or to place a forced or a strained construction on them. On the natural and ordinary interpretation of the words "with a view to cause such other person", i. e., the same person molested, it appears to me impossible to hold that accosting the person, viz., the customer, necessarily is with a view to cause quite another person, the shopkeeper, with whom the accused has no communication, to be interfered with in the exercise of his legal rights.
