

Both the High Court and the trial court rejected the theory of suicide and found that Manju was murdered by her husband by administering her a strong dose of potassium cyanide and relied on the Medical evidence as also that of the chemical examiner to show that it was a case of pure and simple homicide	rather than that of suicide as alleged by the defence. The High Court while confirming the judgment of the trial court affirmed the death sentence and hence this appeal by special leave.

This decision was followed and endorsed by this Court in the case of Dharambir Singh v. The State of Punjab. We shall however discuss Hanumant's case fully in a later part of our judgment. Coming now to the question of interpretation of sec. 32(1) of The Evidence Act, this Court in the case of Ratan Gond v. State of Bihar S.K. Das, J. made the following observations:

    "The only relevant clause of s. 32 which may be said to have any bearing is cl.(1) which relates to statements made by a person as to the cause of his death or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death. In the case before us, the statements made by Aghani do not relate to the cause of her death or to any of the circumstances relating to her death; on the contrary, the statements relate to the death of her sister." In the 'Law of Evidence' by Woodroffe & Ameer Ali (Vol. II) the authors have collected all the cases at one place and indicated their conclusions thus: "To sum up, the test of the relevancy of a statement under Section 32(1), is not what the final finding in the case is but whether the final finding in the case is but whether the cause of the death of the person making the statement comes into question in the case. The expression 'any of the Circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death'; is wider in scope than the expression 'the cause of his death'; in other words, Clause (1) of Section 32 refers to two kinds of statements: (1) statement made by a person as to the cause of his death, and (2) the statement made by a person as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death. The words, 'resulted in his death' do not mean 'caused his death', Thus it is well settled that declarations are admissible only in so far as they point directly to the fact constituting the res gestae of the homicide; that is to say, to the act of killing and to the circumstances immediately attendant thereon, like threats and difficulties acts, declarations and incidents, which constitute or accompany and explain the fact or transaction in issue. 

    (3) The second part of cl.1 of s.32 is yet another exception to the rule that in criminal law the evidence of a person who was not being subjected to or given an opportunity of being cross-examined by the accused, would be valueless because the place of cross- examination is taken by the solemnity and sanctity of oath for the simple reason that a person on the verge of death is not likely to make a false statement unless there is strong evidence to show that the statement was secured either by prompting or tutoring. (4) It may be important to note that s.32 does not speak of homicide alone but includes suicide also, hence all the circumstances which may be relevant to prove a case of homicide would be equally relevant to prove a case of suicide. 

    "5. Substance of accompanying Report from Police officer or Magistrate, together with the date of death, if known. Supposed cause of death, or reason for examination."

The last line indicates that the Doctor was to note two things-(1) the date of death, if known, and (2) the supposed cause of death. This document appears to have been written by PW 33 on 12.6.82 at 4.30 p.m. The relevant portion of the words written by the Doctor are `time since dealt' which were repeated as he states in his statement. After these words some other words have been admittedly scored out and his (PW 33) explanation was that since he had written `time since death' twice, the second line being a repetition was scored out. A bare look at Ex. 128 does not show that the explanation given by the Doctor is correct. We have ourselves examined the said words with the help of a magnifying glass and find that the scored words could not have been `time since death'. The only word common between the line scored out and the line left intact is `death'. To us, the scored out words seem to be `can be a case of suicidal death'. Dr Banerjee however stuck to his original stand which is not supported by his own writing in the document itself. It seems' to us that at the first flush when he wrote the postmortem notes it appeared to him that no abnormality was detected and that it appears to be a case of suicide rather than that of homicide. This, therefore, if the strongest possible circumstance to make the defence highly probable, if not certain. Furthermore, the Doctors's explanation that the scored words were "time since death", according to the said explanation, the scored words ore only three whereas the portion scored out contains as many as seven words. Hence the explanation of the Doctor is not borne out from the document.
